When you resistance train for a sufficient 
duration, be it with barbells, dumbbells,  
machines, or even your body weight, 
your muscles typically increase in size.
But, have you ever wondered  
what underlying changes within the 
muscle drive an increase in muscle size?
Moreover, have you ever wondered if there 
are different types of muscle growth,  
and if so, can you specifically train for them?
In this 5 part video series on muscle growth,  
we'll be aiming to answer these questions 
by going deep into the current science.
In this first video, we'll be overviewing 
all the ways a muscle can increase in size,  
with the following videos going into 
depth on the science of each one. 
In the human body, muscles increase in 
size by increasing in cross-sectional area.
By my count, there seem to be 5 underlying ways 
a muscle can increase its cross-sectional area:  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, 
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,  
myofibrillar packing, muscle hyperplasia, 
and an increase in muscle length.
Soon we'll unpack what these ways 
specifically are and how they can  
create an increase in muscle cross-sectional area.
But first, it is necessary we briefly 
overview the structure of a muscle.
Muscles are organized in hierarchical layers.
Within the whole muscle are 
fascicles, within fascicles  
are muscle fibers, and within 
muscle fibers are myofibrils.
Myofibrils are where the magic 
of muscle contraction happens,  
they consist of an array of sarcomeres.
Sarcomeres are what generate muscle force.
Specifically, when something called the 
myosin head extends from the myosin filament  
and pulls on something called the actin 
filament towards the M-line, force is generated.
Okay, now that we (hopefully) have an 
understanding of the structure of a muscle and how  
they produce force, we're in a good position to 
unpack what underlies an increase in muscle size.
Starting with myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
we need to take a deeper look at the 
muscle fiber level to understand it.
As we've mentioned, muscle 
fibers contain myofibrils,  
which are what generate 
force via their sarcomeres.
Everything else within the muscle 
fiber can be considered the sarcoplasm.
The sarcoplasm largely consists of water but 
also contains other components, such as glycogen,  
sarcoplasmic proteins, and 
non-contractile organelles.
Myofibrillar hypertrophy is where the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm grow at the same pace,  
meaning the relative space taken up by the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm remains the same.
An example can help us understand this further.
Let's say that 85% of a muscle fiber  
is taken up by myofibrils, while 
the remaining 15% is the sarcoplasm.
Let's also say that after 
training for some duration,  
the cross-sectional area of this 
muscle fiber has increased by 30%.
However, this larger muscle fiber is still 
composed of 85% myofibrils and 15% sarcoplasm.
In other words, the myofibrils and sarcoplasm 
still take up the same relative space  
because they grew at the same pace.
As muscle fibers are within fascicles, and 
fascicles are within the whole muscle, an increase  
in muscle fiber cross-sectional area achieved 
by myofibrillar hypertrophy, increases the  
cross-sectional area of fascicles, which increases 
the cross-sectional area of the whole muscle.
As some extra detail, myofibrils may grow  
by increasing in number or by increasing the 
cross-sectional area of pre-existing myofibrils.
In the latter case, it's believed myofibrils 
can increase their cross-sectional area  
by adding sarcomeres below or 
above pre-existing sarcomeres.  
This phenomenon has been called an 
increase in sarcomeres in parallel.
In video 3 of this muscle growth series,  
we'll be going into more detail on the 
science behind how myofibrils grow.
As for the sarcoplasm, as we'll explore more 
in video 4 of this muscle growth series,  
an increase in various components 
that lie within the sarcoplasm,  
such as glycogen and sarcoplasmic proteins, are 
potential contenders that drive sarcoplasm growth.
The discussion on sarcoplasm growth brings 
us nicely on to sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
At the muscle fiber level, 
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
is where the sarcoplasm grows at a 
greater pace than the myofibrils,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the sarcoplasm becomes greater.
Again, let's say that 85% of a muscle fiber  
is taken up by myofibrils, while 
the remaining 15% is the sarcoplasm.
After training for some duration,  
the cross-sectional area of this 
muscle fiber increases by 30%.
However, this larger muscle fiber is now 
composed of 80% myofibrils and 20% sarcoplasm.
The sarcoplasm now occupies more 
relative space in the muscle fiber  
because it grew at a greater 
pace than the myofibrils.
It's important to emphasize the myofibrils 
have not decreased in size or number.
Rather, the myofibrils could have very well grown,  
but it's just the sarcoplasm 
grew at a faster pace.
Alternatively, the myofibrils may have not 
grown at all, while the sarcoplasm only grew.
Myofibrillar packing is the opposite 
of sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,  
it is where the myofibrils grow at 
a greater pace than the sarcoplasm,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the myofibrils becomes greater.
Using the same example, 85% of a 
muscle fiber is taken up by myofibrils,  
while the remaining 15% is the sarcoplasm.
After training for some duration,  
this muscle fiber is now composed of 
90% myofibrils and 10% sarcoplasm.
The myofibrils now occupy more relative space in  
the muscle fiber because they grew at 
a greater rate than the sarcoplasm.
Notice how in this example, I did not say the 
muscle fiber increased in cross-sectional area.
This is because, in theory, myofibrils 
can grow and not increase muscle fiber  
cross-sectional area (and hence ultimately 
the whole muscle's cross-sectional area).
Having said this, there are two potential ways 
I'm aware of where myofibrillar packing can still  
drive an increase in muscle fiber cross-sectional 
area (and thus whole muscle cross-sectional area).
Firstly, in theory, it's plausible myofibrils 
could grow to the point where they push the outer  
wall of the muscle fiber, causing the muscle 
fiber to increase in cross-sectional area.
Secondly, the myofibrils grow, but 
the sarcoplasm also grows to a degree,  
creating an increase in muscle 
fiber cross-sectional area.
It's important to emphasize in this scenario, 
myofibril growth would outpace the sarcoplasm  
growth, as this is following the 
myofibrillar packing definition.
If the sarcoplasm grew at the 
same rate as the myofibrils,  
as we know, this would be 
myofibrillar hypertrophy.
As a mini-review, we've so far explored 
3 underlying ways that can drive an  
increase in muscle cross-sectional 
area: myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, 
and myofibrillar packing.
All three of these are related, 
as all of them have the capacity  
to increase muscle fiber cross-sectional area.
The only distinction between them lies in 
the ratio of myofibril to sarcoplasm growth.
The 4th underlying way that can drive an 
increase in muscle cross-sectional area,  
muscle hyperplasia, is more distinct. 
Muscle Hyperplasia refers to an increase in 
the number of muscle fibers within a muscle.
Remember, as muscle fibers are within fascicles,  
and fascicles are within the whole muscle, 
an increase in the number of muscle fibers  
increases fascicle cross-sectional area, which 
increases whole muscle cross-sectional area.
Now, there appear to be two potential ways 
in which muscle hyperplasia could occur.
Firstly, completely new muscle fibers could 
be manufactured and added to fascicles.
Or secondly, pre-existing muscle 
fibers could split into two,  
thereby increasing the number of muscle fibers.
In video 5 of this musc
le growth series,  
we'll be going into depth on the 
science behind muscle hyperplasia.
However, it's probably important that I mention  
the research on whether muscle hyperplasia 
occurs in humans is far from clear.
Therefore, the idea that in 
humans, muscle hyperplasia is an  
underlying way that increases muscle 
cross-sectional area is tentative.
Moving on, an increase in muscle length 
is the 5th and final way I'm aware of  
that can increase a muscle's cross-sectional area.
An increase in muscle length literally refers to 
an increase in the length of the whole muscle.
Now, in the human body, muscles 
are attached to bones via tendons.
The attachment locations do not change,  
and so if the whole muscle length increases, 
you don't actually visually witness it.
Rather, due to the fixed attachment locations,  
the longer muscle would bulge outwards, and 
this is an increase in cross-sectional area.
So, what underlies this increase in whole muscle 
length and subsequently cross-sectional area?
Well, there is a good deal of 
evidence that resistance training  
can increase the length of fascicles in humans.
Provided fascicles run the 
length of a whole muscle,  
an increase in their length would 
increase whole muscle length.
But, going even deeper, what causes 
fascicles to increase in length?
The answer most likely lies 
at the muscle fiber level.
As we know, myofibrils are within muscle fibers.
Myofibrils are believed to be 
able to increase in length.
Specifically, it's thought sarcomeres are built 
and added in a serial line, thereby increasing  
the myofibril length. This phenomenon has been 
called an increase in sarcomeres in series.
Along with this increase in myofibril 
length, although I wasn't able to find  
concrete evidence on it, presumably 
the sarcoplasm would expand lengthwise  
to support this myofibril length increase, thereby 
cementing an increase in muscle fiber length.
In this scenario, given the myofibrils 
and sarcoplasm grow lengthwise  
at the same pace, it could technically 
be considered myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Anyway, the increase in muscle 
fiber length achieved by this  
would increase fascicle length, which 
can increase whole muscle length.
And as mentioned, due to the muscle's 
fixed attachments in the human body,  
this results in the bulging of a muscle.
Now, there are some complex considerations here.
Some fascicles (and thus 
their residing muscles fibers)  
do not run the entire length of a muscle. 
Therefore, an increase in the length of  
fascicles like these may not necessarily be 
sufficient to increase the whole muscle length.
Furthermore, there could be fascicles 
that run the entire length of the muscle,  
but their residing muscle fibers do not 
run the entire length of the fascicle.  
Therefore, an increase in the length of these 
muscle fibers may not necessarily be sufficient  
to increase the length of the fascicle, and 
therefore the length of the whole muscle.
Nonetheless, in video 3 of this muscle growth 
series, we'll go into more depth on the science  
of how a muscle may increase in length, as well as 
the specific ways you may be able to train for it.
However, I should probably note, 
as we'll explore in that video,  
an increase in muscle fiber length (and 
thus whole muscle length) may be limited.
So there we have it, we've just overviewed the  
5 underlying ways in which a 
muscle may increase in size.
As we've mentioned, the idea 
muscle hyperplasia occurs in humans  
is tentative. Also, an increase in whole 
muscle length could potentially be limited.
Therefore, it's quite likely the ways behind an 
increase in muscle fiber cross-sectional area  
are what commonly drive an increase 
in whole muscle cross-sectional area.
In the next video, we'll be comparing 
the 3 ways in which this may occur:  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, and myofibrillar packing.
More precisely,  
through using the current evidence, we'll try 
to identify if any of these three mechanisms  
are most likely to occur with training, as well as 
if you can specifically train for either of them.
In video 3 of this muscle growth series,  
we'll go even deeper into the science 
of myofibrillar hypertrophy and packing.
In video 4, we'll do the same thing 
but for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,  
and in video 5, we'll dive into 
the science of muscle hyperplasia.