What’s going on, guys?
Sean Naelwanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
in this video today I’m going to give you
the very simple reason why you haven’t been
able to lose weight despite being on a low
calorie diet and exercising multiple days
a week.
Now, I’m getting messages about this every
single day where people will asked for advice
because they say that they’re eating clean
and they’re in the calorie deficit but they’re
either losing a minimal amount of fat or they
aren’t seeing any results at all, and they’ll
wonder if the problem is genetic, you know,
maybe they just have a really slow metabolism,
maybe they’re eating the wrong types of
foods or maybe they need to change something
with their workout plan.
There are always exceptions, obviously, things
like metabolic adaptation are possible.
But if you’re trying to lose body fat and
you aren’t seeing your results, the answer
is almost always the simplest and most obvious
one, and that is that your overall daily calorie
intake is not as low as you think it is.
You might think you’re eating 1,400 calories
a day or 1,800 calories a day, but there’s
a very good chance that you’re actually
taking in quite a bit more than that without
even realizing it.
Now, I’ve been doing fitness coaching in
some form or another for over a decade now
and I can say that in almost every case when
someone says that they can’t lose fat even
though they’re on the low calorie diet,
when you actually sit down with that person
and you break everything down step-by-step
throughout your day it turns out that they’re
not actually on a low calorie diet and they’re
actually eating closer to their maintenance
level without realizing it.
There’s actually a decent amount of research
on this as well, which I’ll link in the
description box which basically shows that
people on a weight loss diet are generally
pretty bad when it comes to caloric(?) reporting,
and they very often under report their calories
and by a very big margin.
This happens either because they’re not
really tracking their food intake very closely,
you know maybe they have come sort of rough
eating plan and they’re just trying to estimate
it throughout the day but they’re going
overboard on portion sizes and they’re adding
in little extra food items here and there,
or they are tracking it but they’re just
making errors with their measurements.
When you consider that a typical calorie deficit
for fat loss would usually be somewhere around
500 calories below maintenance, all it takes
is a few mistakes throughout your day and
your calorie deficit can be pretty easily
erased or at least it can be hugely minimize.
For example; if what you think is one tablespoon
of peanut butter is actually two tablespoons
and that’s a very common measuring error,
that’s a hundred extra calories right there.
Or an extra glass of fruit juice, a handful
of almonds, the cream and sugar that you put
in your coffee, cooking oils, small high calories
snacks that you add in here and there.
Or just being overly generous with your portion
sizes but thinking that they’re clean foods
so it really doesn’t matter, all of this
stuff adds up during the course of a day and
it’s really not hard for it to equal out
to several hundred calories or more.
Another very common thing that you see are
people who do stick to their diet pretty closely
during the week, and so they think it’s
okay to have these full-on cheat days where
they basically eat anything they want and
in whatever amount and they end up off setting
a very good portion of the calorie deficit
that they’re created throughout the week.
Now there’s nothing wrong whatsoever with
what you’d call “cheat foods”, and I
do encourage people to work them into their
diet in moderation but calories are still
calories, and it still all boils down to your
overall calorie intake in the big picture
and one or two days of bingeing on the weekend
that can have a pretty significant effect
on that.
So bottom line, if you’re trying to lose
body fat but you aren’t seeing any results
with the exception of rare situations where
other factors can come into play, you just
have to be honest with yourself and recognize
that you’re probably just overeating.
If you have a true calorie deficit in place
then you will lose body fat, guaranteed.
So if you’re not losing fat, you’re not
actually in the deficit.
So you just need to sit down and honestly
look at what you’re eating throughout the
day and in what amounts, and then add things
up to find out how many calories you’re
actually taking in.
Now, you might think counting calories is
tedious or it’s too obsessive but it’s
actually not that hard once you get the hang
of it and if you’re serious about losing
the fat it really just comes down to your
overall calorie intake versus your overall
calorie expenditure, and so it’s just something
that you need to do at least in the beginning
stages just to get yourself on the right track,
and you’ll probably find that you’re either
eating a lot more than you thought you were
or you are eating what you thought you were,
in which case your actual calorie target is
just too high and you need to reduce it slightly.
So, know your daily calorie target for fat
loss, make sure you’re hitting it with reasonable
accuracy and if the fat isn’t coming off
gradually reduce it until you’re landing
in that standard range of about one to two
pounds loss per week.
It’s really that simple.
It’s just a matter of being more discipline
with tracking your food intake.
If you want to get a complete step-by-step
plan that outlines all the nutritional principles
that you need to maximize fat loss, a huge
collection of step-by-step meal plans that
you can follow as well as the weight training
and cardio workouts that you need then you
can head over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here and the link is in the description
box as well.
So thanks for watching, guys.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like the video, leave a comment
and share if you did find the advice helpful.
Talk you guys again soon.