Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, EliteImpactLabs.com
and in this video I'm going to cover the topic
of creatine and fat loss and whether or not
creatine should be used as part of your fat
burning supplement plan.
So the short answer here is yes.
Creatine monohydrate should be a staple in
your overall supplement plan whether your
goal is to add overall mass or if you're aiming
to reduce your body fat level.
Any time you aim to lose body fat, you have
to create a calorie deficit by burning more
calories than you consume and that deficit
is what stimulates your body to release stored
fat for fuel.
And your central goal during a cutting phase
is to maximize body fat losses while minimizing
muscle losses.
You work extremely hard for every ounce of
muscle that you build, and you want to protect
as much of that mass as possible while you
focus on losing body fat.
And this is why intense weight training is
equally as important during a cutting phase
as it is during a mass building phase.
You need that intense weight training because
you need to stimulate your muscles in order
to encourage your body to hold on to its lean
mass despite being in a net energy deficit.
Now this is where creatine supplementation
ultimately comes into play.
Creatine's main effects are on increasing
strength, power and overall performance at
the gym and it accomplishes this by increasing
the efficiency of your body's usage of ATP,
which is the primary energy molecule that
is used during short, explosive activities
like weight training.
So by continuing to supplement with creatine
during your fat loss phase, you basically
maximize your performance in the gym and this
helps you to maintain your strength which
in turn helps you to spare a higher percentage
of your overall lean muscle tissue.
And since muscle is also metabolically active
and burns calories all on its own, this also
translates to a greater amount of total body
fat burned.
So the dosage for creatine monohydrate is
exactly the same whether you're aiming to
build muscle or lose fat.
You just want to take about 3 to 5 grams of
high quality monohydrate powder daily in order
to keep the muscle tissue continually saturated
throughout your cutting phase.
Now some people do raise concerns about the
potential of creatine to have sort of a "bloating"
effect.
They're afraid it's going to cause their muscles
to take on a softer and less defined appearance
but this is really nothing more than an outdated
myth and creatine does not cause any form
of bloating.
The creatine does cause additional water retention,
but that water retention is intra-cellular
and not subcutaneous.
In other words, creatine drives water directly
inside the muscle cell but it doesn't deposit
any of it underneath your skin.
So if anything, creatine will actually end
up increasing your overall muscle definition
and hardness rather than causing the so called
creatine bloat like most people falsely believe.
So yeah, creatine should definitely be supplemented
with during a fat loss phase because it allows
you to maintain strength and maximize your
performance in the gym and this forces your
body to spare a higher percentage of your
muscle tissue as you lose fat, which improves
your overall appearance and also slightly
increases your resting metabolic rate as well.
For even better effects, I would recommend
that you mix your 3 to 5 grams of creatine
monohydrate with about 3 grams of beta-alanine.
Just like creatine, beta-alanine also increases
muscular strength and endurance but it accomplishes
this through a separate pathway and creatine
and beta-alanine have synergistic effects
when they're used together so 3 to 5 grams
of creatine monohydrate combined with 3 grams
of beta-alanine is the basic combination that
I would recommend whether your goal is to
build muscle or to lose fat.
And if you do want to check out a very high
quality creatine, beta-alanine based formula,
you can check out our MuscleAmp formula over
on EliteImpactLabs.com which I'll link in
the description box below.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson here useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28 Day Mass
Building Plan using the link in the description
box below that includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide which you can
grab from EliteImpactLabs.com and make sure
to join the Elite Impact Labs Facebook page
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video and I'll
talk to you again soon with more free bodybuilding
tips.