Progressive overload is necessary for making 
long-term hypertrophy and strength gains.  
Simply, it refers to progressing 
your training sessions in some way.
Conceptualizing progressive overload as a cycle 
works well. A challenging training session evokes  
muscle and strength gains. These gains enable 
you to apply progressive overload, and in turn,  
this application of progressive overload 
sustains a challenging training session.
Two popular ways to progressive overload are 
with all other training variables constant,  
either increasing the load you use or 
the number of repetitions you perform.
However, how do these two progressive overload  
forms compare to one another for 
long-term hypertrophy and strength?
To my knowledge, there hadn't been 
any studies addressing this. But,  
a new study by Nobrega et al. changes 
this. Let's thoroughly examine it.
The researchers did not 
actually conduct a new study.  
Rather, they used data from two of their 
previous studies to create this analysis.  
The researchers justified this as the 
two studies were quite comparable.
The data taken from study one 
involved 14 previously untrained men,  
while the data taken from study two 
involved 10 previously untrained men.
In both studies, subjects trained the 
leg extension for 3 sets of repetitions  
to failure per session, with 2 minutes 
between sets, for a total of 24 sessions.
In study one, which we'll hereafter 
call the subjects of this study the rep  
overload group, the total 24 sessions were 
achieved by training two times per week  
(on non-consecutive days) for 12 weeks.
Furthermore, this rep overload group used an 80% 
one-rep max load on the leg extension in the first  
session and did not adjust this initial load at 
all throughout the full study. As subjects were  
performing repetitions to failure every 
set, this would have meant this group  
was increasing the number of repetitions 
performed per set across their session.  
That is, they progressively overload via 
increasing the number of repetitions performed.
Now, I did kind of just lie. During the 
6th week (corresponding to after the 12th  
training session), leg extension one-rep max was 
re-tested to return the rep overload subjects to  
training with a relative 80% one-rep max load. 
But this was only done once, and subjects kept  
this exact new load with no further adjustments 
for the remaining 6 weeks during which they  
would have again been simply progressively 
overloading via increasing repetition numbers.
In study two, which we'll hereafter call the 
subjects of this study the load overload group,  
the total of 24 sessions was achieved 
by training three times per week  
(on non-consecutive days) for 8 weeks.
Furthermore, this load overload group 
adjusted their load every set and across  
sessions to ensure they performed roughly 
9-12 repetitions to failure every set.  
This means they would have predominantly been  
progressively overloading via increasing the 
load used to fall within the 9-12 rep range.
As you probably noticed, although both groups 
ultimately performed 24 training sessions,  
they did not do so identically. Training 
frequency and total study duration differed.  
This is a limitation that 
will be returned to later.
Nevertheless, before and after 
the 24 training sessions,  
one-rep max on the leg extension 
and vastus lateralis cross-sectional  
area at approximately 50% of the 
thigh bone length were measured.
Additionally, total volume load (calculated 
as the product of sets x repetitions x load)  
accumulated by the end of 
the 24 training sessions,  
as well as volume load progression across 
the 24 training sessions was measured.
By the end of the study, total volume 
load, despite being numerically greater  
on average for the load overload group, was not 
statistically different between the two groups.  
However, progression of volume 
load across the 24 sessions was  
statistically greater for the load overload 
group compared to the rep overload group.
PAUSE
After adjusting the data based on baseline 
values via an analysis of covariance,  
increases in relative and absolute 
leg extension one-rep max were not  
statistically different between the two groups.
Note, relative increases can be 
thought of as percentage changes.  
With this data specifically, the rep 
overload group saw an average 31.4%  
increase in leg extension one-rep max, while the 
load overload group saw an average 38.3% increase.
Absolute increases can be thought 
of as measurement unit changes.  
With this data specifically, the rep 
overload group saw an average 14kg leg  
extension one-rep max increase, while the load 
overload group saw an average 15.3kg increase.
PAUSE
Moving forward, also after adjusting for 
baseline values via an analysis of covariance,  
increases in relative and absolute 
vastus lateralis cross-sectional  
area was statistically greater for the load 
overload group versus the rep overload group.
So overall, this data potentially 
suggests for increasing one-rep max,  
there may be no difference between progressively 
overloading via increasing load or repetition  
numbers. But for hypertrophy, increasing load 
may be superior to increasing repetition numbers.
Quite interesting, when combining both group’s 
data, although the researchers did not find a  
significant correlation between the total volume 
load accumulated by the end of the 24 sessions  
and one-rep max or vastus 
lateralis cross-sectional gains,  
a significant correlation was 
found for volume load progression  
across the 24 sessions and gains in one-rep 
max and vastus lateralis cross-sectional area.
As the load overload group saw greater 
progressions in volume load across the  
24 sessions, this led the authors 
to suggest this greater volume  
load progression may explain the greater 
hypertrophy experienced for this group.
Having detailed all of this, there are 
some extremely important limitations  
and counterevidence. Let’s explore this 
to derive some more informed conclusions.
Firstly, recall this study combined and 
analyzed two independent studies together,  
and as such it was not a 
randomized controlled study.
Secondly, it’s interesting that both 
groups saw similar one-rep max gains.  
Yet, it’s more than likely all subjects 
trained suboptimally for strength.  
Both groups trained with loads that 
enabled 8 or more repetitions per set.  
Yet, the current evidence indicates training with 
loads that result in you performing 5 or fewer  
maximum repetitions is probably more favorable 
for one-rep max gains. For example, Schoenfeld  
et al. found with the back squat and bench press, 
adjusting loads every set and across sessions to  
maintain 2-4 repetitions to failure produced 
larger bench press and back squat one-rep max  
gains versus adjusting loads every set and across 
sessions to maintain 8-12 repetitions to failure.
One question arising from this is what if both 
groups simply started with a 2-4 rep max load,  
with one group progressively overloading 
via adding reps from hereafter,  
and another group simply adjusting loads every set 
and across sessions to maintain 2-4 repetitions,  
would both still be similarly 
effective for promoting one-rep  
max gains? Hopefully future 
research explores this.
Thirdly, we know that although both groups 
ultimately performed 24 training sessions, they  
did not do so identically. The rep overload group 
performed 3 leg extension sets 2x per week for 12  
weeks, meaning they performed 6 leg extension sets 
per week. The load overload group performed 3 leg  
extension sets 3x per week for 8 weeks, meaning 
they performed 9 weekly leg extension sets.
However, using other data, it’s actually 
difficult to say this is a true limitation.
The evidence indicates when performing 10 or 
fewer weekly sets for a muscle or exercise (as  
both groups were doing), training frequency does 
not seem to matter for strength or hypertrophy.  
That is, whether you perform these 10 or fewer 
weekly sets for a muscle all in one session,  
or across two or more days does not 
really matter. So neither training two  
or three times per week are inherently 
superior to each other in this regard.
However, the load overload group did 
perform 9 weekly sets on the leg extension,  
while the rep overload group only 
performed 6 weekly leg extension sets.  
Based on the current data, it’s 
probably likely that on average,  
performing 9 weekly sets for an exercise or muscle 
is better than fewer for hypertrophy and strength.  
Thus, on a per week basis, the load 
overload group was likely gaining more.  
However, remember the load overload group only 
trained for 8 weeks to reach the 24 sessions,  
while the rep overload group trained for 
12 weeks to reach the 24 total sessions,  
thus these study's duration differences likely 
cancel out the per week growth differences.  
Ultimately probably meaning that use of different 
training frequencies may not be a major problem.
Having said all of this, it’s important to 
note muscle and strength gain are not constant.  
Generally, each week an individual would 
incrementally experience fewer gains.  
This throws another curveball and 
makes the comparisons pretty confusing.
Therefore, overall, it’s truly 
difficult to comment on how these  
difference in training frequency and 
study durations between the two groups  
impacts the results. It would have been much 
better to have controlled these variables.
The fourth limitation is that 
the sample sizes were small,  
as is most commonly the case 
with resistance training studies.  
14 subjects were in the rep overload group, 
and 10 subjects in the load overload group.
Small sample sizes increase the 
chance of errors. Let me explain.
Different individuals, despite training 
with exactly the same training variables,  
can have very different outcomes.
For example, Hubal et al. had 243 men and 
342 women train preacher and concentration  
curls for 12 weeks. On screen is a graph 
illustrating how the subject's biceps  
cross-sectional area was impacted by training. 
Most individuals tended to experience a 10-30%  
increase in biceps cross-sectional area, 
but there were individuals experiencing  
well above this as well as individuals 
experiencing gains well below this.
Here’s the thing, with small sample sizes,  
your chance of selecting subjects that vary 
widely in response abilities is increased.
Expanding on this, we know the Nobrega data found 
the load overload group experienced higher vastus  
lateralis cross sectional area gains versus the 
rep overload group. But it’s entirely possible,  
due to the small sample sizes, the load 
overload group consisted of subjects  
with an average better muscle building 
ability versus the rep overload group.  
Thus, this would explain why the load overload 
group saw greater vastus lateralis gains,  
and not necessarily that overloading 
via load increases is superior.
The fifth limitation relates to the 
measures and variables used in the study.
Vastus lateralis thickness (at 
roughly 50% of the thigh bone  
length) was measured). But what about gains 
at other regions of the vastus lateralis,  
and even gains at other regions of 
the quadriceps muscles. For instance,  
other data indicates leg extension training 
(the exercise trained by subjects) heavily  
grows the rectus femoris part of the quadriceps. 
Thus, what did growth look like in this muscle?
Only the leg extension was trained, 
what about other exercises?
The subjects were also 
previously untrained individuals,  
do these results apply to trained individuals?
Finally, although I would not 
consider this a limitation,  
rather potential counterevidence, it’s quite 
difficult to explain the finding of the load  
overload group experiencing greater 
vastus lateralis cross-sectional area  
gains compared to the rep overload 
group when considering other data.
There’s quite a bit of data indicating 
loads between 30% and 80% one-rep max,  
so long as repetitions are performed very close 
or to failure, produce similar muscle hypertrophy.
One of the reasons for this is likely because 
when performing repetitions very close or to  
failure within this loading zone, you’re going to 
be evoking quite high mechanical tension levels.  
More precisely, muscle fiber recruitment and 
force production by the individual muscle fibers  
is going to be quite high (these are two parts of 
mechanical tension). The reason this matters is  
because mechanical tension is currently the 
best categorized stimulus for hypertrophy.
If you start with a given loading, let’s say 80% 
one-rep max, and progress via increasing your  
repetition numbers over sessions, the relative 
load you’re training with will technically  
decrease. But so long as you’re performing 
repetitions to or very close to failure,  
and that relative loading remains 
in the 30 to 80% one-rep max zone,  
you would presumably think hypertrophy 
should more or less be optimally stimulated.
If you start with a given load that has you 
perform a certain number of repetitions,  
and you opt to try and maintain the precise 
relative loading (and subsequently rep range)  
every session via increasing the load, provided 
you’re performing repetitions to or very close  
to failure, and the relative loading you’re 
trying to maintain is within the 30 to 80% zone,  
you would also presumably think hypertrophy 
should more or less be optimally stimulated.
My point with all this is there currently 
does not appear to be any rationale as to  
why progressively overloading through 
increasing load may be superior  
to progressively overloading via 
increasing repetition numbers.
However, recall the authors 
of the study proposed that  
the greater volume load progression 
achieved by the load overload group,  
compared to the rep overload group, 
might explain the greater hypertrophy.
Put another way, greater volume load progression 
week to week might mean more hypertrophy.  
Indeed, the researchers, when combining 
the data for all subjects, did note a  
correlation between volume load progression 
and vastus lateralis cross-sectional gains.
However, the problem here is that not only 
does correlation not indicate causation,  
but other areas of the research suggest volume  
load progression is completely 
dissociated from hypertrophy.
Schoenfeld et al. had a group of men with 1.5-9 
years of training experience perform a range of  
exercises each for 3 sets, 3 
times per week for 8 weeks.
One group of subjects (a high rep 
group) performed each exercise  
with 25-35 repetitions to failure each set.
Another group of subjects (a moderate rep group)  
performed each exercise with 8-12 
repetitions to failure each set.
Note, both groups adjusted loads every 
set and across sessions to ensure  
subjects kept training to failure 
within their respective rep range.
Across the 8 weeks, volume load progression was 
greater for the subjects training with 25-35 reps,  
versus the subjects training with 8-12 reps.
If volume load progression itself 
was truly important for hypertrophy,  
training with 25-35 reps should be 
superior to training with 8-12 reps.  
Yet, as we’ve mentioned already, 
loads between 30% and 80% one-rep max  
(which would include the aforementioned 
rep ranges) are likely comparably effective  
for hypertrophy when repetitions are 
performed very close or to failure.
Another study by Brigatto et al. either had 
men with 2-8 years of training experience  
target a specific muscle all in one session 
(the 1x group), or across 2 sessions a week  
(the 2x group). All other training variables 
(including weekly set numbers, exercise selection,  
and rest interval duration between 
sets) were the same between both groups.
Across 8 weeks of training, volume 
load progression on the exercises  
was greater for the 2x group versus the 1x group.
Yet, increases in thickness of various 
muscles were similar between both groups,  
again indicating volume load progression 
may not be predictive of hypertrophy.
Two studies by Souza Junior et al., 
which we’ve thoroughly evaluated  
in a previous video, fundamentally seemed 
to compare progressively overloading via  
decreasing rest interval duration 
between sets to increasing load.  
Despite volume load progression across 
8 training weeks being larger for the  
subjects increasing load, increases in arm and 
thigh cross-sectional area were similar between  
the subjects decreasing rest interval durations 
between sets and the subjects increasing load.
Finally, as just mentioned, these two Souza 
Junior et al. studies indicated that as a  
form of progressive overload, decreasing 
rest interval durations between sets was  
as effective as increasing load. Of course, 
these studies did have their own limitations,  
which we’ve addressed in a previous video. 
However, If we took these findings literally,  
and combined it with the findings of 
this Nobrega study (that is, we’ll  
literally assume increasing load is better than 
increasing repetition numbers for hypertrophy),  
using some illegal maths, we would come 
to the conclusion that as decreasing rest  
intervals is similarly effective to increasing 
load for hypertrophy, but increasing load is  
better than increasing repetition numbers for 
hypertrophy, decreasing rest interval durations  
between sets would be better than increase 
repetition numbers for hypertrophy. I’m sure  
many would agree this is an odd conclusion. 
The only way to truly assess the validity of  
this would be to have further studies comparing 
these different forms of progressive overload.
In summary, although this analysis by 
Nobrega et al. was highly interesting,  
numerous limitations and potential counter 
evidence exist. As such, I believe we can  
be nowhere close to definitively concluding 
that increasing load is better than increasing  
repetition numbers for hypertrophy, or that both 
methods are similarly effective for strength.
Further research is unquestionably required.
Before closing out, I should note I came across 
a post by Menno Henselmann briefly detailing this  
Nobrega et al. analysis in an Instagram post, 
on which Brad Schoenfeld (a resistance training  
researcher) not only gave his brief thoughts 
but also stated that his team has conducted  
a study on this topic, with the results to be 
released soon. When his study does get published,  
I 100% plan and look forward to covering 
it on the House of Hypertrophy channel.
As always, thank you for watching. I hope 
this video was insightful in some way!