Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here with
a Muscle In Minutes Q&A where I give quick,
to the point answers to your fitness questions.
So today’s question is on the issue of proper
pre and post workout nutrition, so quite simply,
what should you eat before and after your
workout if your goal is to maximize muscle
growth or fat loss.
So the very simple answer that I’d give
here is that within the context of an overall
diet where you are hitting your individual
protein, carb and fat needs for the day as
a whole, from high quality food sources and
spread out over 3 or more individual meals,
the specific contents and the specific timing
of your pre and post workout meals most likely
is not going to have any noticeable effect
on your bottom line results over the long
term.
So for pre-workout nutrition, just aim to
get in any basic protein and carbohydrate
source within a couple hours of training,
and structure the meal in whatever way feels
best for you during the workout.
So whether that means a small shake or a larger
solid food meal, it’s really just a matter
of personal preference and it depends on what
feels best for you when you train.
From there, assuming that you got your pre-workout
meal in within a couple hours of your workout,
there’s really no need for immediate post
workout nutrition, because protein digestion
and absorption is a very slow process and
you’re still going to have the same protein
in your system from your pre-workout meal
even after your workout is over.
So for post workout nutrition, same idea here,
just get in any high quality protein and carbohydrate
source, whether it’s a shake or solid food,
within a couple hours of completing your workout.
Now I know this might sound overly simple
but that’s really all there is to it.
There honestly aren’t any “special”
protein sources or special carb sources to
consume before and after training that are
going to have any, or make any significant
difference over any other sources, so again,
just base your post workout nutrition and
your pre workout nutrition on personal preference
and focus on meeting your overall nutritional
needs for the day as a whole.
So thanks for watching this video, make sure
to like, comment and subscribe if you found
the information helpful, you can also get
instant access to my complete Body Transformation
Blueprint System by clicking the icon at the
top of the video, or using the link in the
description box below, and make sure to visit
my official website over at SeanNal.com for
all of my latest articles, tips and other
updates.
Talk to you again soon.