In the bodybuilding world, it's not uncommon 
to see a constant tension technique being used.
Typically, this is done by avoiding 
locking out the joints in an exercise,  
resulting in the muscle producing continuous 
tension for the full duration of a set.
It's hypothesized that compared to locking 
out the joints in an exercise and allowing  
the muscles to briefly rest, keeping constant 
tension on the muscle is a more powerful stimulus.
Preventing the muscle from 
"breathing", so to speak,  
can decrease the oxygen content in muscles 
and result in the build of metabolites.
Although it's far from crystal clear, 
some research indicates these events  
may play some role in muscle hypertrophy.
So, what does the research say - can 
constant tension enhance muscle growth?
A study by Goto et al. does suggest that 
constant tension builds more muscle.
44 men with at least 1 year of training experience 
were assigned to a partial or full group.
Both groups trained the triceps skull crusher.
The full group began with 
their elbows in full extension,  
lowering the weight to their maximal elbow flexion 
angle and then extending back to full extension.
The partial group performed the exercise 
from 45 to 90 degrees of elbow flexion,  
meaning it was a partial range of motion 
that kept constant tension on the triceps.
Both groups trained with 3 sets of 8 reps (with an 
8-rep max load relative to their range of motion),  
three times per week for 8 weeks.
Increases in triceps cross-sectional area  
(measured at 60% of the upper arm length) was 
significantly greater for the partial group.
For the partial group, the researchers also 
measured the degree of hypoxia experienced by  
the subjects after performing the 
constant tension skull crushers.
In this case, hypoxia refers to a 
decrease in muscle oxygen levels.
Interestingly, the researchers found 
a correlation between the degree of  
hypoxia experienced by subjects and their 
increase in triceps cross-sectional area.
Put differently, the subjects in the partial group 
that experienced the highest decrease in muscle  
oxygen levels, also experienced the greatest 
increases in triceps cross-sectional area.
Now, correlation does not prove causation.
But maybe this study suggests a constant 
tension can enhance muscle growth  
by creating greater muscle hypoxia.
However, this is only one study.  
How does it compare with the rest 
of the constant tension research?
Pinto et al. had a comparable study 
design to the Goto et al. study.
30 untrained men were assigned 
to a partial or full group.
Both groups trained the preacher curl 
for around 2-4 sets with 8-20 reps,  
twice per week for 10 weeks.
The full group performed the exercise 
from 0 to 130 degrees of elbow flexion  
(more or less a full range of motion).
The partial group performed the exercise 
from 50 to 100 degrees of elbow flexion,  
meaning it was a partial range of motion 
that kept constant tension on the biceps.
Increases in biceps thickness 
favored the full group.
So, this study suggests a full range of motion 
is superior to a partial range of motion  
that applies constant tension.
Therefore, this study somewhat directly 
conflicts with the Goto et al. study.
So, collectively, these two studies 
cannot provide us with a clear view  
of the effectiveness of a partial range 
of motion that applies constant tension.
There actually is another study that 
used a constant tension technique  
through a partial range of motion, but I'll 
detail this towards the end of the video.
Moving on, although the studies by Goto and Pinto  
did use a constant tension, they did so by 
significantly reducing the range of motion.
It is possible to use a constant tension without 
significantly reducing the range of motion.
A study by Tanimoto et al. explored 
the effectiveness of doing just this.
24 untrained men were assigned to 
constant tension or normal group.
Both groups trained the same 5 exercises: 
machine squat, chest press, lat pulldown,  
abdominal crunch, and back extension. Each for 
3 sets of repetitions to failure each session.
The normal group performed each exercise 
with a full range of motion, using an 85-90%  
one-rep max load and a 1-second lifting, 
1-second lowering, and 1-second pause phase.
The pause phase enabled the 
subjects to rest the muscle.
With these variables, this 
group ultimately performed  
around 8 repetitions to failure each set.
The constant tension group avoided 
locking out the joints in the squat,  
chest press, and lat pulldown, resulting in 
constant tension. They used a 50-60% one-rep  
max load and a 3-second lifting and 3-second 
lowering phase, there was no pause phase.
The no pause phase meant that the 
abdominal crunch and back extension  
was also performed with constant tension.
Interestingly, with these variables,  
this group also ultimately performed 
around 8 repetitions to failure each set.
Now, some may be thinking 
the use of different loads  
and repetition tempos between 
groups is confounding.
However, research indicates loads 
that allow you to perform between 5  
to 35 repetitions to failure each set are 
similarly effective for building muscle.
Furthermore, repetition durations 
lasting from 0.5 seconds,  
all the way up to 8 seconds, are also 
similarly effective for building muscle.
Therefore, the use of different loads and 
repetition tempos is probably not an issue.
On to the results: both groups experienced 
statistically similar increases in thickness  
for the chest, biceps, triceps, abdominal, 
sub scapula, quadriceps, and hamstrings.
Now, some percentages seem to favor the 
normal group. But, bear in mind, the  
percentages are average. Given the results were 
statistically similar between groups both groups,  
the variation within each group was greater 
than the variation between both groups.
Therefore, we can only suggest 
that using a constant tension  
that does not significantly reduce range 
of motion produced similar increases in  
measures of muscle growth to 
a normal full range of motion.
A second study by Tanimoto et 
al. supports these findings.
16 untrained men were assigned to 
a constant tension or normal group.
Both groups trained the leg extension  
for 3 sets of repetitions to failure, 
three times per week for 12 weeks.
The constant tension group performed the 
exercise from 90 to 0 degrees of knee flexion,  
used a 50% one-rep max load and a 3-second lifting 
and 3-second lowering phase without any pauses.
This actually resulted in constant 
tension on the quadriceps.
This is because the leg extension is somewhat 
unique, locking out the knee in this movement  
still results in considerable quadriceps 
tension. Moreover, at the bottom of the exercise,  
so long as you don't pause, your 
quadriceps are still contracting.
Therefore, the constant tension group 
was able to achieve a constant tension  
while still performing a near full 
range of motion on the leg extension.
The normal group also performed the movement from 
90 to 0 degrees of knee flexion. But they used an  
80% one-rep max load, with a 1-second lifting, 
1-second lowering, and a 1-second pause phase.
This pause phase at the end of repetition  
allowed the subjects to momentarily rest 
and take tension off the quadriceps.
Increases in quadriceps cross-sectional area 
were statistically similar between both groups.
To summarize, when using a constant tension that 
does not significantly reduce range of motion,  
the current evidence suggests it is similarly 
effective to a full range of motion.
When using a partial range of motion that applies 
a constant tension, the research isn't clear.
Goto et al. suggest it is superior 
to a full range of motion,  
whereas Pinto et al. suggests it is 
inferior to a full range of motion.
However, these aren't the only two studies  
exploring the effectiveness of a partial 
range of motion that uses constant tension.
In the last video, we detailed a 
fascinating new study by Pedrosa et al.  
finding that a leg extension performed with a 
partial range of motion at long muscle lengths,  
produced greater muscle growth than 
a full range of motion leg extension.
A partial range of motion at long muscle lengths  
is technically a constant tension 
technique a lot of the time.
Therefore, this might suggest that a constant 
tension technique, that is applied via a  
partial range of motion at long lengths, 
could be the optimal way to build muscle.
If you're interested in more details 
regarding the Pedrosa et al. study,  
I highly recommend you check out the video on it.
Nevertheless, as discussed in that video, more 
research is without a doubt required before fully  
concluding that a partial range of motion at long 
muscle lengths is the optimal way to build muscle.