High-intensity training refers to high effort,  
low volume, and lower frequency training. 
We'll cover the precise details shortly.
But often, high-intensity training is contrasted 
to high volume and perhaps more frequent training,  
the training style many iconic figures 
during the Golden era of bodybuilding,  
such as Arnold, are known to 
have performed and recommended.
As Arnold describes in his 80s 
Encyclopedia of modern bodybuilding,  
he believed “you need to do at 
least 5 sets in order have the  
volume of training necessary to fully 
stimulate the available muscle fiber."
In this video, we're going deep 
into high-intensity training to  
figure out if it's truly the 
optimal muscle-building way,  
as well as compare it to higher volume 
and more frequent training regimes.
Numerous different variations of 
high-intensity training exist,  
and famous bodybuilders such as Mike Mentzer and 
Dorian Yates were known to train in this style.
However, many folks (including Mentzer and Yates)  
credit Arthus Jones for popularising 
high-intensity training in the 1970s.  
The term “high-intensity training" appears 
as early as 1973 in an article by Jones.  
Jones’ further writings on the topic can be 
found in his numerous magazine and book writings.
Who was Arthus Jones?
He founded Nautilus, a company that 
manufactured training machines,  
machines designed to match the 
strength curves of a muscle.
Jones was far from the typical 
man. He travelled extensively.  
His motto was "younger women, faster 
airplanes, and bigger crocodiles".
A Nautilus building in 
Florida was home to a Gomek,  
an 18-foot saltwater crocodile 
Jones wanted to grow to record size.
He ran businesses that imported wild animals and  
is believed to have owned a zoo in 
Louisana after the 2nd world war.
We noted many variations of 
high-intensity training exist.  
But 3 common themes are consistent 
throughout all variations.
The first is the emphasis on training 
to failure and sometimes even beyond.
Arthus Jones instructed in 
his Nautilus Bulletin books,  
"a set is properly finished only when 
additional movement is utterly impossible,  
curl until you can't even begin to bend your 
arms, squat until you can't start up from  
the low position, press until you cannot move 
the bar away from your shoulders and chest".
Mike Mentzer's stated in his book "working to this 
point of failure, when another rep is impossible  
despite the greatest effort, ensures you pass 
through the break-over point, a point in the  
set below which growth cannot be stimulated, 
and above which growth will be stimulated".
The second common theme is performing a low number 
of sets per exercise, typically only one set.
In another Arthus Jones' book, he says "how 
many sets of the exercise? one. Additional  
sets usually serve no purpose and may produce 
a state of overtraining with some subjects".
A quote by Dorian Yates reads "One set at 
extreme intensity does the muscle-building job".
The third main common theme is 
the low frequency of training.
Arthur Jones initially advocated for three 
full-body weekly workouts, but later amended to  
training each muscle only once or at most twice 
per week, he states "how many weekly workouts,  
not more than two, and some people will produce 
better results from only one weekly workout.  
More is not always better, and in the 
case of exercise is usually worse".
Mike Mentzer echoed this, recommending 96-120 
hours of rest between training sessions.  
In fact, Mentzer also states in his book he had a  
number of personal clients who 
trained once every 10-14 days.
All three themes are closely connected.
High-intensity advocates suggest when 
training with true maximal effort  
(as you do when training failure), you can 
only perform so much volume (hence the one  
set recommendations), and only so frequently 
too (hence the low-frequency recommendations.
As Arthus Jones describes “The secret, if 
there is one, is high-intensity. And when  
you actually train with high-intensity, 
you don’t need a lot of volume.”
Likewise, Mike Mentzer states “If you’re 
skeptical [of Heavy Duty’s low volume],  
your subconscious child is telling you 
that more is better. In some cases,  
that’s true. More money is better than 
less. But you can’t take that principle  
and blindly apply it to exercise and 
expect to get anything out of it.”
Heavy duty was the name of Mike 
Mentzer's high-intensity training style.
Now we have a good understanding 
of what high-intensity training is,  
is this method of training truly superior 
for muscle hypertrophy and strength?
A few stories exist of individuals allegedly 
gaining an incredible amount of muscle mass with  
high-intensity training in a short time, with the 
Colorado experiment being the most fascinating.
63 lbs of muscle in 28 days 
through high-intensity training?  
Allegedly the infamous 
Colorado experiment found this.
The experiment took place in 1973, 
at the Colorado State University  
under the supervision of Dr. Elliot Plese.
In this experiment, Casey Viator 
(a successful bodybuilder,  
who was actually the youngest ever AAU 
Mr. America winner at the age of 19)  
trained high-intensity style for 28 days, 
while Arthus Jones himself trained for 22 days.
The program is believed to look like this, 
at least something along these lines.
One set was performed to failure in the 
prescribed rep ranges, and all exercises  
were performed with no rest between them. All 
exercises were performed on Nautilus machines too.
The findings were published in the 
September ironman magazine in 1973.
Viator gained 63.21lbs of muscle 
and Arthu 15.44lbs of muscle.
Incredible results, but are 
they too good to be true?
Likely, I’d argue yes.
In the 4 months before this experiment, Casey 
Viator was believed to not have trained at all,  
as he was recovering from 
a serious accident at work.
Similarly, Jones was believed to not have trained 
in the 4 months preceding the Colorado experiment,  
yet he had training experience in the past and  
at one point was believed to 
have been a muscular 205lbs.
As a result, muscle memory (the phenomenon 
where your body can quickly rebuild lost muscle)  
is certainly confounding this experiment.
Aside from this, Casey at least was clearly 
a gifted individual for putting on mass,  
so genetics are a consideration, 
something Arthus Jones did make clear.
I think the use of anabolics 
cannot be ruled either.
Now, Arthus Jones was opposed to anabolics, 
something he expressed many times in his writings.
In a report on the Colorado experiment, 
Jones is reported to have said  
"the use of so-called growth drugs 
is neither necessary nor desirable."
Moreover, in a T-nation article by Ellington 
Darden, someone who worked with Arthus Jones,  
it’s reported Jones hired someone to shadow 
Casey to ensure no anabolics were used.
Despite all this, I still think it’s impossible 
to rule out the possibility of anabolics,  
even if Casey did not use during the 28 days, 
prior use can presumably still influence things.
Aside from the Colorado experiment, 
Ellington Darden also put forth other  
accounts of individuals gaining abnormal amounts  
of muscle mass with high-intensity 
training in the T-nation article.
Furthermore, I also came across 
an article by Tim Ferris,  
the author of the popular 4-hour work 
week, describing how he used Arthur  
Jones's high-intensity style training 
to put on 34lbs of muscle in 4 weeks.
So what are we to make of all these accounts?
Do they prove high-intensity training is 
the ultimate muscle hypertrophy system?
In my view, no.
As alluded to, many plausible confounders exist. 
The anecdotal data are also difficult to verify,  
and none of these experiments 
COMPARE how high-intensity  
training differs from other training methods.
Something that does compare how different 
training methods compare is experimental research.
With each of the three themes 
of high-intensity training,  
we can examine what the experimental 
research says about them.
In my opinion, this is a much better way to 
evaluate the efficacy of high-intensity training.
We noted training to failure is one theme 
in all high-intensity training protocols.  
Recall Jones' and Mentzer's statements.
But is training to failure truly needed 
to maximize hypertrophy and strength?
Starting with hypertrophy, in 2021,  
Grgic et al. conducted a meta-analysis 
of all the available evidence.
For the unaware, a meta-analysis statistically 
combines all the current evidence on a topic,  
thus increasing statistical power 
and reliability when done well.
Based on 7 studies (collectively 
comprising 130 men and 89 women),  
there was no difference in muscle growth between 
training to failure and not training to failure.
After independently assessing the involved 
studies, most had the non-failure training  
groups leave 3 to 0 repetitions in reserve (that 
is, they stopped 3 to 0 reps away from failure),  
thus it seems training with this 
is similar to training to failure.
Having said this, a subgroup analysis of 
studies done on trained individuals only  
did find training to failure to be 
better than not training to failure.
However, a major limitation is only 2 studies 
were involved in this subgroup analysis, and both  
of these may not necessarily suggest training to 
failure in trained individuals is truly superior.
In the one study by Karsten et al., 
they found leaving 5 reps in reserve  
was inferior to training to failure, 
thus this study only suggests training  
to failure may be better than leaving 5 reps 
in reserve. It does not tell us how leaving  
3 to 0 reps in reserve could compare 
to failure training in trained folks.
The other study included in the subgroup 
analysis was by Pareja-Blanco et al.,  
and it found failure training was better for 
overall hypertrophy versus non-failure training.  
However, this was a velocity-based study, 
they had subjects terminate their sets once  
their lifting velocity decreased by a certain 
percentage, so it’s difficult to know what reps  
in reserve the non-failure training group used. 
But based on some data provided, it seems the  
non-failure group may have been training with 
5 or more reps in reserve. For example, this  
group seemed to perform only around 5 reps with 
a 70% one-rep max load, fairly far from failure.
Thus, again, this study does not inform us of how  
leaving 3 to 0 reps in reserve 
may compare to failure training.
Fortunately, since this analysis by Grgic et al. 
in 2021, a study by Santanielo et al. has emerged.
These researchers ultimately established  
in men with an average of 5.1 
years of training experience,  
leaving mainly 3 to 0 repetitions in reserve was 
similar to training to failure for hypertrophy.
Thus, trained folks may also experience optimal  
gains while stopping 3 to 
0 reps away from failure.
Mechanistically, I'd argue 
these findings make sense.
When we think about what causes muscle 
growth, training to failure probably does  
not provide any more benefit than 
stopping 3 to 0 reps from failure.
Allow me to explain.
Back in 2010, Brad Schoenfeld published a famous 
paper postulating that mechanical tension,  
muscle damage, and metabolic stress 
are all drivers of muscle hypertrophy.
Fast forward to 2019, Brad 
Schoenfeld teamed up with  
Wackerhage and others to create an updated paper.
They detail how the evidence behind metabolic 
stress and muscle damage being drivers of  
hypertrophy is not clear cut. Many cases exist 
where more metabolic stress or more muscle damage  
are not associated with more hypertrophy.
Conversely, the evidence seems to 
demonstrate mechanical tension as  
the most likely and potent hypertrophy stimulus.
In other words, we have solid 
reasons to believe mechanical  
tension is the primary driver of hypertrophy.
And when we understand what precisely mechanical 
tension is, there's evidence training to failure  
does not produce higher levels versus 
stopping 3 to 0 reps shy of failure.
Let's dive into this a little further.
Mechanical tension is equal to the 
force generated by muscle fibers.
 
Components within muscle 
fibers, called mechanosensors,  
detect forces produced by the muscle fiber and 
transduces these forces into a signaling cascade  
that results in muscle protein synthesis (which 
are the proteins that make our muscles bigger).
The concept of motor units helps us 
understand overall mechanical tension further.
A motor unit refers to a single motor neuron 
(that originates from the spine) and the  
multiple muscle fibers it innervates. 
When the single motor neuron sends an  
electrical signal through to the muscle fibers 
it innervates, those muscle fibers produce force.
Within a whole muscle, 
different motor units exist,  
and their characteristics lie across a spectrum.
On one end are low threshold motor units, and 
on the other end are high threshold motor units.
Typically, a low-threshold motor unit consists of 
a small motor neuron that innervates slow-twitch  
muscle fibers that produce low amounts of force 
but are highly fatigue resistant. Due to this,  
low-threshold motor units are described as 
highly fatigue resistant but low force-producing.
A high-threshold motor unit generally consists of 
a large motor neuron that innervates fast-twitch  
muscle fibers that produce high amounts of 
force but are highly fatigable. Therefore,  
high-threshold motor units are described 
as high-force producing but very fatigable.
For maximizing overall mechanical tension (and 
thus the stimulus for overall muscle growth),  
we’d want to recruit as many motor 
units as possible during an exercise  
(from the low-threshold motor units all the 
way up to the high-threshold motor units).
We'd also want each of the motor units 
to be producing decent amounts of their  
respective force capacities for a fair duration.
Here’s the main points:
Firstly, It’s not clear when you 
reach maximal motor unit recruitment,  
and the motor unit literature indicates 
this can differ between muscles.
However, the literature indicates this is 
likely achieved a while before failure.
For instance, one study suggests maximal 
motor unit recruitment for the shoulder  
and trap muscles may be obtained 
3-5 repetitions before failure.
Secondly, by the time you’ve reached failure,  
many motor units are likley past-producing 
their highest forces and are just fatiguing.
Remember, it’s tension (analogous to force)  
that’s categorized as a prime stimulus for muscle 
hypertrophy. The idea that more motor unit fatigue  
is beneficial for muscle hypertrophy is 
not supported by the current literature.
A motor unit modeling study by Potvin and 
Fuglevand demonstrates our points nicely.
Their model included 7 different motor 
units, ordered in terms of thresholds.
Motor unit 1 was the lowest threshold motor unit,  
while motor unit 120 was the 
highest threshold motor unit.
The graph on-screen depicts the 
contribution of each motor unit to a 50%  
maximal isometric contraction held until failure. 
The total contraction lasted 100 seconds.
Except for motor unit 120, 
all of the other motor units  
were recruited from the start of the contraction.
Motor units 1, 20, 40, and 60 produced steady low 
forces throughout the full contraction duration.  
This makes sense, these would be 
considered the low-threshold motor units  
(which produce low forces but 
are highly fatigue resistant).
Motor unit 80, a higher-threshold motor 
unit, produced its most force for the  
set at the start of the contraction, 
where it thereafter gradually fatigued.
Motor unit 100, a higher-threshold motor 
unit, continued to increase its force  
contribution up until the 65-second 
mark, and thereafter began to fatigue.
Motor unit 120, the highest-threshold motor unit,  
was recruited at the 70-ish second 
mark, and steeply increased its force  
contribution up until the 95-ish second 
mark, where it then steeply fatigued.
This data demonstrates motor unit recruitment, 
as well as the maintenance of at least  
decent amounts of force production 
from the individual motor units,  
is achieved before failure. 
At the point of failure,  
no additional motor units nor enhancements 
in individual motor units force occurred.
This probably explains why 
leaving 3 to 0 repetitions  
in reserve is sufficient for muscle growth.
I should restate this data was from 
modeling isometric contractions.
Recruitment patterns and strategies 
likely differ between isometric and  
the isotonic contractions that 
occur during typical exercises.
Yet, I’m unaware of any reason to 
believe the main points (that failure  
offers no additional motor unit recruitment or 
enhancements in individual motor units force)  
would not also be the same 
with isotonic contractions.
Moving on, is training to failure 
needed to max strength gains?
The Grgic et al. meta-analysis found based 
on 15 studies (collectively comprising 265  
men and 129 women), there was no difference in 
gains between failure and non-failure training.
A subgroup analysis also found the results 
stayed true for trained individuals.
After independently assessing 
the studies, most of them  
seem to have had subjects leave between 5 
to 0 repetitions in reserve. So training  
with 5-0 reps in reserve may be similar to 
failure training for producing strength gains.
Making this section clear, training 
to failure does not seem to promote  
additional hypertrophy or strength adaptations.
Recall that high-intensity folks advocate low 
volumes, typically only one set per exercise.
Does the literature support this recommendation?
In 2017, a meta-analysis by Schoenfeld et  
al. combined the results of 15 studies 
comparing low to high volume training.
Of the 15 studies, 14 had the low volume 
groups train with 1 set per exercise,  
while the high volume groups 
trained with 3 sets per exercise.
It was found high volume was better than 
low volume for increasing muscle mass.
Since 2017, three additional studies 
published also indicate performing  
3 sets per exercise produces more 
muscle growth than performing 1 set.
Why is this?
It seems the higher volume attained with 3 sets  
ultimately stimulates the anabolic 
pathways within muscle fibers more.
Demonstrating this, a 2010 study 
by Burd et al. compared fed-state  
myofibrillar protein synthesis 
after training with either 3  
or 1 set of reps to failure on the leg 
extension with a 70% one-rep max load.
Performing 3 sets resulted not only in 
a greater fed-state myofibrillar protein  
synthesis amplitude but also a longer 
duration versus performing the 1 set.
What about strength adaptations, how do 
low and high volumes compare for this?
For this, we have a 2017 
meta-analysis by Ralston et al.
They combined 9 studies comparing 
low vs high volumes for strength.  
7 of the 9 studies had the low volume 
groups train only one set per exercise,  
and the high volume groups 
train with 3 sets per exercise.
It was found strength gains were 
greater with the high volumes,  
indicating that 3 sets per exercise 
produce greater strength than 1 set.
So overall, the current literature indicates  
that 1 set per exercise does not 
maximize size or strength gains.
Another point mentioned by some high-intensity 
folks is that sets should never be added.
Arthus Jones' stated, "never perform more 
than three sets of any one exercise".
Mike Mentzer states "the tendency among 
enthusiastic bodybuilders is to add more  
sets to their workouts, etc., etc", "this tendency 
must be kept in check and avoided at all costs".
Yet, some data suggests in trained individuals,  
modestly increasing weekly sets performed for 
a muscle group may accelerate muscle growth.
A study by Aube et al. had 
trained men train the back  
squat and leg press with a variety of set numbers.
After 8 weeks of training, the researchers 
divided the subjects into a high,  
moderate, or low responder group in terms 
of how much they grew their anterior thigh.
Remember, the subjects were trained and had been 
consistently training before the study commenced.
It was found those who grew their anterior thigh 
the most in the high responder group had increased  
their weekly set numbers the most relative to 
what they were performing before the study.
Another study by Scarpelli et al. found in 
trained men, having them perform 20% more  
weekly sets for their quadriceps relative 
to what they performed before the study,  
produced larger vastus lateralis growth versus 
performing a prescribed number of 22 weekly sets.
Collectively these data indicate 
for trained individuals,  
modestly increasing weekly 
set numbers (perhaps by 20%)  
can be effective for accelerating muscle gains, 
and may be a useful tool in the event of plateaus.
The final main common theme of high-intensity 
regimes is lower frequency training.
We noted Jones' ultimately recommended training 
each muscle group no more than twice per week,  
with perhaps better results from only one.
Mike Mentzer recommended 96-120 hours of rest 
between training sessions. In fact, recall  
Mentzer also states he had a number of personal 
clients who trained once every 10-14 days.
What does the literature 
say on training frequency?
A range of studies has examined when keeping 
all other weekly training variables equal  
(including the number of sets performed 
for a muscle group each week),  
whether higher or lower 
frequency training is better.
A 2019 meta-analysis by Schofield et 
al. combined 13 studies that did this  
and established similar muscle growth between 
lower and higher training frequencies.
Out of the 13 studies included, 11 
had subjects train with a total of 12  
weekly sets per muscle group or fewer.
So when training with a total of 12 
or fewer weekly sets per muscle group,  
lower and higher training frequencies 
seem to be similarly effective.
As one illustration of this, Gomes et 
al. recruited 23 trained men with an  
average bench press one-rep max of 103kg 
and an average squat one-rep max of 132kg.
A lower frequency group trained their 
muscle groups at a once per week frequency,  
while a higher frequency group trained their 
muscle groups at a five times per week frequency.
Both groups accumulated 10 
weekly sets per muscle group.
After 8 weeks of training, lean mass 
gains were similar between both groups.
Now, when performing higher training 
volume (more than 12 weekly sets),  
the research is conflicting on whether lower 
or higher frequency training is better.  
Some find higher frequency to be better, others 
lower frequency, and some with no differences.  
We've more thoroughly examined this in our 
ultimate guide to training frequency video.
Nonetheless, it's clear to see for hypertrophy, 
the research fails to demonstrate lower frequency  
training is superior. Higher frequency 
training appears perfectly viable.
As for strength, a 2018 meta-analysis by Grgic et  
al. combined 7 studies and found with 
all other weekly training variables equal  
(again, including weekly sets per muscle 
group), training frequency had no impact.
All 7 studies had subjects train with a total of 
12 or fewer weekly sets per muscle group. Thus,  
with these volumes, both low and high-frequency 
training appear similarly effective for strength.
When performing more than 12 weekly sets per 
muscle group, one study by Bartomolemi et al.  
compared training muscles with a frequency 
of 3/4x per week to only once a week.
Strength gains were superior 
for the 3/4x frequency group.
However, this isn't a consistent finding.
3 other studies indicate with more 
than 12 weekly sets per muscle group,  
lower and higher frequencies were 
similarly effective for strength gains.
Fascinatingly, returning to the 2018 Grgic 
et al. meta-analysis, the researchers found  
when combining studies that did not equate weekly 
sets between lower and higher frequency training  
(resulting in the higher frequency training groups 
performing more weekly sets on their exercises),  
strength gains were greater 
with higher frequency training.
This suggests using higher frequency 
training as a tool to help you perform  
more weekly sets may be an effective 
way to produce greater strength gains.
In total, the research suggests lower 
frequencies are not superior for strength gains.  
Higher frequency training is perfectly viable.
In fact, the Grgic et al. meta-analysis 
suggests higher training frequencies,  
when used in a way to accumulate more weekly sets, 
can effectively produce more strength adaptations.
Moving forward, I wanted to discuss 
one point behind why high-intensity  
folks seemingly advocate lower frequencies.
I think they assume that the body's 
capacity to recover is very limited.
I'm not saying the body can handle 
an infinite amount of training.  
There's going to be a point above which 
more training will cause recovery problems.
Yet, I feel high-intensity folks significantly 
underestimate where this point may be.
After all, the repeated bout effect exists.
Ever notice how when you first start 
training, extreme soreness and muscle  
performance decrease in the multiple days 
after. But after further weeks of training,  
soreness is minimal and no longer is muscle 
performance hampered for multiple days after.
This is because of the repeated bout effect, the 
name given to the range of adaptations your body  
produces to make you resilient to damage, 
soreness, and force production decreases.
It's not clear precisely what creates the repeated 
bout effect, but a 2017 study hypothesized neural,  
muscle-tendon, connective tissue, and 
inflammatory adaptations may all play a role.
Now, many studies aiming to examine the time 
course of recovery after lifting weights  
only do so after a single training session.
For example, this study found after trained 
men performed a session consisting of 3  
sets of repetitions to failure with a 12 
rep-max load on the bench press and squat,  
performance was still not fully 
recovered 48 hours after the session.
Some may say this data indicates if your 
training with multiple sets to failure,  
more than 48 hours of rest 
is required between sessions.
However, this suggestion ignores 
the fact the recovery time course  
was only examined after one training 
session. What would happen to the  
recovery time course after repeatedly 
training with multiple sets to failure?
Due to the repeated bout effect,  
we'd expect recovery durations 
to progressively become shorter.
My favorite study demonstrating 
this concept is this paper.
They had 12 previously untrained perform 
5 sets of 15 maximal eccentric only leg  
extension repetitions on an isokinetic 
dynamometer once a week for 10 weeks.
Due to the machines, training loads would 
have increased as subjects got stronger.
5 sets of 15 MAXIMAL eccentric 
repetitions are extremely fatiguing.
Eccentric training is known to 
produce more soreness and damage  
compared to normal training 
when first exposed to it.
The data from the study demonstrates this.
After the first training session, Creatine kinase  
(an indirect measure of muscle damage) was 
significantly elevated a day later, and muscle  
soreness and maximal isometric force production 
were still decreased 5 DAYS after the session.
However, as the training weeks progressed, 
the repeated bout effect kicked in and  
all markers gradually decreased. This is 
something I feel people underappreciate.
By the 10th week, the training 
session produced NO soreness,  
NO creatine kinase increases, and NO decreases 
in maximal isometric force in the upcoming days.
In other words, subjects were 
recovering within 24 hours of  
the intense eccentric training session 
after 10 weeks of consistent training.
Again, I'm not saying your body can recover 
from an infinite amount of training,  
rather the body can adapt robustly and 
handle a good amount of training over time.  
I feel high-intensity training 
regimes underappreciate this.
I want to make it clear that by no means 
what this video aim to discredit or hate on  
high-intensity training. The goal was to evaluate 
if high-intensity training is supported by the  
current literature in the most non-bias way 
I can. I hope I was able to accomplish this.
I’d like to say Mike Mentzer's book 
is highly interesting and in my view  
extraordinarily well written. I feel Mike 
Mentzer was simply interpreting the data and  
knowledge that was available at the time 
he composed the book (the early 2000s).
Since then, we have a substantial amount of new 
research, and presumably in the next 20 years,  
more will emerge.
Nevertheless, I still wanted to discuss aspects  
of high-intensity training I 
think are positive in some way.
We mentioned training to failure does not 
appear to be essential. Stopping 5-3 reps  
from failure seems to be sufficient for maxing 
strength and hypertrophy gains, respectively.
Yet, stopping a certain number 
of reps from failure requires  
you accurately judge how far from failure you are.
This is challenging, and having experience with 
training to failure is likely required to do this.
Psychologically, it's easier to train to failure 
when performing only one set per exercise.
So high-intensity training can be a great  
way to accustom yourself to the 
feeling of training to failure.
Progressing on, it's important to 
remember high-intensity training  
will unquestionably still build 
a substantial amount of muscle.
We've mentioned how performing 3 sets per exercise  
tends to be better than 1 set 
for strength and hypertrophy.
Yet, performing 3 sets does not 
give you 3x the more strength and  
hypertrophy versus performing 1 set, 
rather only marginally more gains.
Returning to the Ralson et al. meta-analysis  
which found greater strength gains with 
high volume versus low volume training,  
the effect size difference was 0.18, which is 
interpreted as being a trivial difference only.
As for the Schoenfeld et al. meta-analysis which  
found greater hypertrophy with high 
volume versus low volume training,  
the effect size difference was 0.24, which 
is interpreted as a small difference only.
Now, it's important to remember 
the studies involved in these  
analyses largely lasted 12 weeks 
or less, so these trivial to small  
gains achieved with 3 sets versus 1 set 
may become more pronounced long-term.
Regardless, it's clear you're still going 
build a lot of muscle with low volume  
training like high-intensity training. 
Many people, for one reason or another,  
may not want to invest extra time in higher 
volume training for slightly more gains. So  
high-intensity training can be a great 
time-efficient method for these folks.
Finally, and this is a very important point I 
want to emphasize, it might be possible that  
some individuals truly grow more with lower 
volume training versus higher volume training.
Remember all the research findings 
presented thus far are the average results.
Such results are not always 
applicable to an individual.
Matter of fact, this study demonstrates this.
16 men and 18 women trained the unilateral 
leg press and unilateral leg extension with  
a 7-10 rep-max load, three 
times per week for 12 weeks.
With one-leg, subjects trained 
each exercise with only one set.  
With the other leg, they trained 
each exercise with three sets.
Cross-sectional area of the quadriceps 
was measured before and after the study.
The graph shows the individual 
responses for each participant.  
The Y-axis shows the cross-sectional area 
increases for the leg that trained with 3 sets,  
and the X-axis shows the cross-sectional area 
increases for the leg that trained with 1 set.
The results show a near 50/50 split, with 50% 
seeing better gains with 3 sets per exercise,  
and the other 50% seeing similar 
or more gains with 1 set.
The researchers also looked at strength (they 
averaged out the results from 3 different  
strength tests), and the findings 
were similar, a near 50/50 split.
These findings truly surprised me, and if 
they can be replicated on a larger scale,  
they might suggest many folks experience 
no benefit with higher volumes.
However, it's essential to remember 
only 34 subjects were in this study,  
so it's very difficult to say this 
exact distribution applies to everyone.
Moreover, all these subjects were 
untrained. As mentioned , there's  
data showing increasing set numbers in 
trained individuals benefits hypertrophy,  
so I'm skeptical these distributions 
hold true for trained individuals.
Regardless, it is likely true some individuals 
grow at least the same or even possibly more with  
lower volume training, and high-intensity 
training may be great for these folks.
Crystalizing everything, the current literature  
does not suggest high-intensity training 
is optimal for building muscle or strength.
Training to failure isn't essential, 
higher volumes tend to be better than  
lower volumes on average, and higher training 
frequencies are also perfectly viable for gains.
Still, high-intensity training will build a 
substantial amount of muscle and strength,  
and for some individuals, low-volume 
training like this could actually be optimal.