Hey, what's up?
This is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And in today's video lesson, I want to talk
about the issue of post workout nutrition,
specifically carbohydrate intake.
Now, the practice of consuming huge doses
of simple sugars post-workout has pretty much
become a religion in bodybuilding circles.
You finish your workout, you mix up a post-workout
shake consisting of whey protein and some
rapidly absorbing carbs, and you make sure
to consume it immediately following your training
session.
The logic behind consuming these post-workout
sugars is along the lines of re-elevating
glycogen levels, and spiking your insulin
in order to increase the absorption of your
post-workout protein.
While there's certainly nothing wrong with
consuming simple carbs following your workout,
it's definitely not the critical "Must" that
pretty much everyone has made it out to be.
Let me dissect this myth for you in two simple
steps.
First of all, a standard weight training workout
does not deplete glycogen levels to any significant
degree.
Unless you're performing exhaustive endurance
work, your glycogen levels will only be depleted
by a maximum of about 30% following an intense
weight training session.
And unless you were planning on training those
same muscle groups again in the next 24 hours
or so, this is really of no practical concern.
This is maybe a legit concern for hard training
athletes who workout multiple times per day,
but definitely not for the average bodybuilder.
Because of this, the idea that you must immediately
replenish these glycogen levels is simply
false.
By finishing your workout and resuming your
regular nutrition plan, those glycogen levels
will be naturally re-elevated and ready for
your next workout.
Secondly, the notion that insulin levels need
to be spiked in order to maximize nutrient
absorption is unfounded to begin with.
The reality is that the body always keeps
blood sugar and insulin levels within a fairly
precise range regardless of the specific foods
you consume or the amounts of those foods
that you consume.
Not only that, but most high protein foods
elicit a significant insulin response from
the body in the same way that carbohydrates
do.
For example, beef has an insulin index score
of 51, which is around the same as that of
brown rice, brown pasta or rye bread.
Whey protein is also highly insulinogenic.
So, with these two points out of the way,
it should be pretty clear why slamming 80grams
of maltodextrin post-workout is simply unnecessary.
There's no need to immediately replenish your
glycogen levels.
And there's no need to spike your insulin
levels.
Now, is consuming that simple post-workout
carbohydrate is going to hurt you?
No.
That's not what I'm saying. 
If you prefer it, and if it fits into your
daily carbohydrate requirements, a liquid
post-workout carb source is totally fine.
It's convenient and it's an easy source of
calories for those on higher calorie diets.
In addition, many people find that they just
don't have much of an appetite following their
workouts, and this is where liquid carbs can
come in handy as well.
The point here is merely to demonstrate that
post-workout simple sugars are not a necessity.
Whether you consume dextrose, maltodextrin,
brown rice or potatoes, it's not going to
make any practical difference to your bottom
line muscle gains.
Keep your pre and post-workout nutrition simple.
Get in a good source of high quality protein
and carbohydrates within a couple hours of
hitting the gym, followed by the same thing
within a couple hours of completing your workout.
Ultimately that's pretty much all there is
to it.
Personally, I always bracket my workouts with
whey protein, because I do believe there is
some practical benefit in keeping branched-chain
amino acid levels elevated around this time
period.
But ultimately as long as you're getting a
high quality source of protein, that's ultimately
the most important thing.
If you want to make the nutritional aspect
of your bodybuilding program as simple and
straightforward as possible, make sure to
sign up for the no fail system over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
That's where you gain instant access to a
complete set of free muscle building meal
plans, ranging from 2,000 calories all the
way up to 6,000.
The plan is to give you a variety of meal
options, and they make it in your daily macro-nutrient
numbers a much easier task.
And you can just click the link in the description
box for sign up details.
So, that's all for today, make sure to subscribe
if you haven't already.
And also make sure to join the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night.
So, thanks again for watching, and I'll talk
to you again soon with more free tips.