Hey, guys, Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here.
And today, I want to briefly cover the fat
burning benefits of whey protein.
So, there's really no question about it.
When it comes to high quality muscle building
protein, whey is at the very top of the list.
It's extremely high bioavailability and superior
amino acid profile, make it ideal for anybody
looking to maximize their muscle size and
strength gains.
But what about whey and fat loss?
Aside from its ability to provide you with
a very high quality protein source for recovery
in between workouts, whey protein also has
a few direct benefits when used as part of
a fat burning diet as well.
So, the first benefit is on appetite control.
If you trying to lose body fat, you have to
create a calorie deficit by consuming fewer
calories than you burn each day.
Quite simply, you have to eat less.
And although the goal is certainly not to
starve yourself, it's perfectly normal to
experience increased feelings of hunger when
your body is in a calorie deficit.
It's well known that the protein is the most
filling of the three macronutrients with carbs
and fats being the other two.
And it appears that whey protein may be a
especially effective at curbing hunger during
periods of calorie restriction.
And it does this in two main ways.
The first, one of the individual sub-fractions
found in whey, GMP, stimulates the release
of CCK, which is a hormone that is responsible
for controlling hunger.
And the second is that whey protein suppresses
the production of ghrelin, which is another
hormone that stimulates your appetite.
The second benefit is improved mood during
calorie restriction.
You know, feeling moody, and irritable and
even borderline depressed are not uncommon
when you've been following a fat loss diet
for an extended period of time.
It's simply a natural reaction when your body
is not receiving all of the energy that it
needs from your diet.
And whey protein contains high levels of the
amino acid tryptophan, which aids in the production
of serotonin.
And serotonin is a neurotransmitter that is
involved in regulating mood, but that gets
depleted when your calories are restricted.
So, by naturally raising serotonin levels,
whey protein can help to regulate your mood
during your cutting phase.
And if you feel good, you're obviously going
to be more likely to stick to your diet all
the way through the end.
The third benefit is increased fat burning
during exercise.
Several studies have shown that when used
as a pre-exercise protein source, whey can
actually increase the percentage of body fat
that is used for fuel during the session while
spot -- sorry, simultaneously sparing more
lean body mass.
However, it should be noted that those studies
were conducted in animals and that further
human research would be needed in that area.
But the findings are pretty interesting nonetheless.
So, the fact remains, whether your goal is
to gain overall mass or reduce your body fat
levels, whey continues to show that it is
quite simply the most valuable source of protein
out there.
It has the highest absorption rate of any
protein on the planet.
It has the best amino acid profile.
It has beneficial effects on the immune system
and in overall health.
And as I've outlined in this video, it also
has direct fat burning properties as well.
If you do want to check out very high quality
source of whey protein isolate, make sure
to check out our IsoM3 blend, over on EliteImpactLabs.com,
a link to that in the description box below.
And that's a source of 100% micro-filtered,
ultra-filtered whey isolate.
And it's one of the highest whey proteins
that you're going to find out there.
So, I hope you found this information useful
today.
If you did enjoy the video, please make sure
to like, comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, which includes a free workout,
meal plan and supplement guide using the link
in the description box below.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, for free daily articles, videos,
tips and free supplement giveaways.
Thank very much for watching.
I appreciate all of your support.
And I'll talk to you again soon.