Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And in this video lesson, I want to do a quick
review of L-Arginine supplements, and discuss
whether or not they have any place in a well-rounded
bodybuilding program.
So, L-Arginine is the primary compound that
is found in most of the pre-workout nitric
oxide boosters, with the main forms being
L-Arginine AKG, L-Arginine HCL as well as
regular L-Arginine.
And the idea here is that because L-Arginine
is a precursor to nitric oxide, and since
nitric oxide is a powerful vasodilator, which
means that it widens your blood vessels, that
L-Arginine supplementation is going to increase
blood flow to the working muscles, which is
going to improved muscular power, endurance
and recovery.
But is there any truth to this?
Well, a common theme that you'll find in the
supplement industry is that they will simply
take an ingredient that has a specific benefit
in the body.
And then follow the logic that "If some is
good, then more must be better."
And this is pretty much exactly the case when
it comes to L-Arginine supplementation.
Yes, L-Arginine is an important substance
in the human body.
And yes, it does play a central role in nitric
oxide production.
However, there isn't a single shred of research
available that shows that additional L-Arginine
supplementation boosts nitric oxide levels
or that it has any effect on strength or performance
in healthy lifters.
And here's the simple reason why.
In order for the nitric -- nitric oxide pathway
to function, you need both the enzyme, in
this case, it's an enzyme called "Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase or eNOS for short,"
as well as the substrate, which is L-Arginine.
And the reaction between these two is what
produces nitric oxide.
And in healthy individuals, the amount of
L-Arginine that is in the bloodstream, already
far exceeds the amount of eNOS.
In other words, the eNOS enzyme is already
completely saturated with L-Arginine, and
L-Arginine is not the limiting factor in nitric
oxide production.
And because of this, supplementing with 5grams
or 10grams of extra L-Arginine is not going
to have any additional effect on nitric oxide
production, since your body already produces
enough to completely max out the effects.
For those with specific clinical conditions
like heart disease or diabetes, there might
be some benefits to L-Arginine supplementation,
but this only applies to an extremely small
minority of the population.
So, why do supplement companies continue cramming
L-Arginine into their formulas?
Well, the reason is pretty simple.
Either one, they don't care about your results.
Number two, they don't know any better or
it's just a combination of both.
And L-Arginine also happens to be an extremely
inexpensive ingredient, making it even more
attractive for shaggy companies to add to
their products.
So, that's really the bottom line.
For an otherwise healthy bodybuilding trainee,
there is really no reason to supplement with
additional L-Arginine as part of your overall
program.
Your body already produces plenty of it.
And the research has never demonstrated any
increases in strength, endurance or muscle
growth as a result of L-Arginine supplementation.
If you are serious about building muscle and
burning fat and improving your overall physique
in an effective and efficient manner, then
stick to proven science-based supplements
with reliable track records such as whey protein,
creatine monohydrate, Beta Alanine, fish oil,
multivitamins et cetera.
And if you do want to check out some very
high quality formulas in those categories,
you can check out our product line over in
the EliteImpactLabs.com store.
And I will include a link to that in the description
box below.
So, I hope you found this supplement lesson
useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, which includes a free workout,
meal plan and supplement guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
I'll also link that in the description box.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, for daily videos articles,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.