Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
the muscle in minutes Q&A, where I provide
quick-to-the-point, no B.S.
answers to your bodybuilding and fitness questions.
Today's question is, is missing a workout
bad?
So, just how negative of an effect is it going
to have if you miss a particular work?
Well, this is going to really depend on the
situation.
If you're talking about missing a workout
and then making it up the following day, then
in the long run, it's probably not going to
really have any effect at all.
I mean, if you're training three days a week
for example, let's say Monday, Wednesday,
Friday, and you have to put off Monday's workout
until Tuesday or Wednesday's workout off until
Thursday, as long as you're hitting those
three workouts per week over the long-term,
it's really not going to have any negative
affect at all.
If you're talking about missing a workout
for that entire week where you can't make
it up until that workout comes around again
the next week, let's say, you're on a five-day
split, Monday through Friday.
If you miss a workout there, you're pretty
much screwed.
You're going to have to skip that workout
for the entire week and then make it up the
following -- following week.
In that case, it's bad in the sense that you're
missing an opportunity to stimulate muscle
growth.
If your diet is on point missing a workout
for one week is not going to result in a actual
loss of muscle tissue, most likely.
I mean, it is going to depend on the person.
But usually you're not going to actually lose
muscle tissue as a result of inactivity for
probably about two or three weeks of not training
a particular muscle.
And if your diet is on point, you know, that's
going to lessen the negative impact.
So, if you miss a workout one week, and you
can't make it up until the following week,
it's bad in a sense that you are missing an
opportunity to stimulate new growth.
But it's likely not going to result in actual
muscle loss.
So, skipping workouts, I mean, obviously you
want to stick to your schedule as closely
as you can.
You want to be as consistent as you possibly
can.
But there are going to be some days where
you might wake up, and maybe on a particular
day you just feel particularly bad, may be
you're really busy that day.
You have a lot to do.
And you think, well, you know, I can miss
this workout today, and make it up maybe tomorrow.
And it's not going to affect my overall weekly
schedule.
And I'll probably get a better workout the
following day.
I'm not really opposed to that as long as
you're truly doing it, because you really
believe that you're going to have a better
performance the following day, and it doesn't
affect the overall schedule.
So, in that case, from time-to-time, that's
fine.
But you want to stay as consistent as possible.
And if you're skipping workouts and you can't
make them up until the following week, obviously
that's something you want to avoid at all
costs.
You know, if you feel crappy on a particular
day, but you know you could still train, then,
definitely, you know, you want to get yourself
into the gym and get that workout done.
So, those are just a few thoughts on that
particular topic.
I hope you found this video useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below, which includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide, which you
can get over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
I appreciate all of the support.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free bodybuilding tips.