What's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, seannal.com, realscienceathletics.com,
and in this video today I want to talk about
one of the main reasons why so many people
out there who begin a muscle-building program
never see any significant results over the
long term, and it's quite simply because they
don't understand what the true purpose of
their workouts is, and they're just focused
on the wrong things every time they go into
the gym.
Now before we get started here, if you're
new to the channel and you do find this information
helpful, don't forget to hit that subscribe
button below to keep yourself up to date on
future videos, and also make sure to follow
me over on Instagram as well.
When I'm not here on YouTube that's where
you'll find me.
I post there every single day with a variety
of different fitness tips, workout clips,
meals and other updates, so don't miss out
on that either.
It's @sean_nalewanyj.
So, let's get this straight here.
Building muscle is not about getting a huge
pump, it's not about feeling the burn during
your exercises, it's not about making yourself
as tired and sore and sweaty as possible after
the session, and it's not about special techniques
like supersets or drop sets or forced reps
or things like that.
Now, all of those things can have their place,
okay.
It's normal that you're going to get a pump
during your training.
It's normal that your muscles will burn during
your sets.
It's normal to be tired and sore afterwards
to some degree, and certain advanced techniques
can be thrown into the mix here and there
as well if they're used properly.
But none of these things actually get to the
real heart of what consistently building muscle
is actually about.
What building muscle is really about is improving
your training performance over time.
All those other things I just mentioned, pump,
burn, soreness, those will all occur as a
natural byproduct of striving for improved
performance in the gym, but they aren't the
actual limiting factors when it comes to stimulating
growth.
But the problem is that most people in the
gym get this completely backwards.
So they're going into the gym with no set
plan in place, they're basically just winging
it each time, not tracking anything concretely
in terms of their weight and reps for each
lift, and essentially just training until
they feel that burn, they get that pump, until
they're sweating and fatigued, and they assume
that if they just show up and quote unquote,
"get a good workout in," and they just do
that over and over again, that that's what
they need in order to see results, and usually
that is still going to produce results to
some degree, and your performance will naturally
improve over time as well, but a lot of times
those results will only come in the initial
stages because newbies in the gym can pretty
much do almost anything and still see gains
for the first few months, but then eventually
the results will plateau or you will continue
seeing gains longer term, but they'll just
come at a much slower pace and you'll never
quite break through to those higher levels.
So if you want to maximize your gains and
build muscle at an optimal rate all the way
up to your genetic potential, you need to
flip these things around.
So stop worrying about all this extra bodybuilding
fluff, and instead get right down to the core
of what muscle growth is really about, which
again, is about improving your training performance
over time, or progressive overload as we usually
call it.
So right now, as you sit there watching this
video, your muscles have within them a certain
finite strength capacity, so they have a certain
ability to perform physical tasks, and the
way you stimulate your body to build upon
its existing muscle mass is by challenging
that current strength capacity to trigger
an adaptive response, and then continually
building on that to higher and higher levels
over time.
So if you're constantly performing tasks that
are already well within your muscles' current
ability, even if it burns or it produces a
pump, or creates some soreness, your body
still has no real incentive to make any significant
changes because it already has the ability
to do those things or at least it only has
a minimal to moderate incentive, and so the
resulting gains will also be minimal to moderate.
So it's only when you attempt something you've
never done before that your body is forced
to adapt and to become bigger and stronger
in response to it.
And that can take a lot of different forms
in the gym.
It can mean adding more weight to the bar,
performing more reps with the same weight,
keeping your weight and reps the same but
adjusting the way that you perform the lift
to make it more difficult, so maybe slowing
down the negative or implementing a static
hold on either end of the rep, or just making
the lift more mechanically challenging using
a different form.
It can also mean performing more total volume.
It can mean using a higher frequency.
There're a lot of different forms of progressive
overload that ultimately can be used.
If you're still a beginner to intermediate
lifter, then basic weight and rep increases
are where the majority of your focus should
go, because that's the simplest and most reliable
way to make progress over time, and then once
you've built up a good size and strength foundation
and you become more advanced, then you can
start implementing some of these other methods.
But regardless of which method you use, again,
the bottom line is that you need to stop winging
it in the gym and you need to start getting
more analytical and more concrete when it
comes to your training performance.
So each time you go into the gym you should
know exactly what you did last time in terms
of exercises, weight used, reps executed,
and any other important notes, and you should
know exactly what you need to do this time
in order to improve upon that previous performance
in some way, even if it's just doing one extra
rep with the same weight.
So you should have it all clearly written
down, whether it's in a training logbook or
in your phone, so you know exactly where you
stand at any given time, and what has to be
done to just get a little bit better, and
this is something that so few people do in
the gym, which is a big part of the reason
why, if you just look around, most people
in the typical, average gym only get modest
results at best.
They either aren't striving for concrete progressive
overload at all, or they are but because they
don't write their workouts down and they aren't
being precise about it, they don't progress
nearly as quickly as they could be.
When you actually write things down you'll
progress much faster because all of your objectives
during each workout will be right there in
front of you, and if you fail to improve on
your previous performance, you'll be able
to clearly see it.
So your training logbook is going to keep
you accountable every time you go into the
gym.
On top of that it's also going to let you
know whether or not your muscle-building progress
is actually moving in the right direction,
because if your performance in the gym has
plateaued, if you're not getting stronger
in some capacity every week or at least every
couple weeks, then you'll know that something
is off and that adjustments need to be made,
and I did a video that outlines 12 fixes that
you can apply if your strength has plateaued,
and I'll link that in the description box
below if you want to check that out.
And then of course on the other hand, if you
are seeing continual improvements in your
performance over time, then you'll know that
you're generally on the right track.
Your workouts are successfully triggering
an adaptive response, you're resting adequately
and your nutrition is at least good enough
to allow those adaptations to take place,
and maybe there are some things that you can
do to speed up your results even further,
but you at least know that you're moving in
the right direction.
If you're like most people in the gym who
are just chasing after the pump and bouncing
around from exercise to exercise without any
real clear idea of what they're doing, then
you have no concrete way of measuring this,
and that's why most people just end up running
circles with their programs.
So I've been repeating this pretty much like
broken record since 2005, but progressive
overload is the ultimate, ultimate bottom
line when it comes to building muscle.
It's the final verdict on whether you're successfully
stimulating muscle growth over time, and all
these other factors, okay, pump, burn, soreness,
fatigue, these are just automatic byproducts
of that process, but by and large they aren't
the things that you need to be specifically
striving for.
If you found this helpful and you want to
learn exactly how to optimize progressive
overload so that you can build muscle in the
most efficient way possible, [inaudible 00:07:21]
the ideal weekly workout split, exercise selection,
volume, rep ranges et cetera, then make sure
to take my physique quiz over at quiz.seannal.com,
because that'll hook you up with the proper
training plan as well as the proper nutrition
plan that you need based on your specific
body type goals and experience level.
You can click at the top of the screen for
that or use the link in the description box.
When it comes to supplementation you can also
visit realscienceathletics.com to check out
my research-backed, clinically dosed supplements
that I personally formulated to help fully
streamline your program and get the very best
results possible, link is also in the description,
and as always make sure to hit that like button,
leave a comment down below and subscribe if
you haven't already, in order to stay in the
loop on future videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.