Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here,BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today’s video I’m going to giving
you 7 simple tips that you can start following
right away to both reduce the amount of time
that it takes you to fall asleep as well as
to help you sleep more deeply and for longer
periods of time each night.
Now getting a sufficient amount of restful
sleep every night is actually very important
when it comes to maximizing muscle growth,
fat loss and overall health, it will keep
your energy levels, your concentration and
your motivation at its peak which will obviously
benefit both in and out of the gym, it will
optimize your levels of testosterone and IGF-1,
reduce cortisol levels as well as improve
your body’s overall fat burning efficiency
as well.
Now keep in mind that there are many, many
different methods that you could use when
it comes to improving sleep quality and I
couldn’t possibly mention all of them, but
I’m just going to condense this video down
into 7 of the more well documented tips, and
the ones that work best for me and for the
people that I’ve discussed this topic with.
And if you personally use a particular method
that I don’t mention in the video, then
you can go ahead and post it in the comment
section below.
So, here are the 7 tips.
Bodybuilding sleep tip #1 is to maintain a
consistent sleeping and waking schedule from
day to day.
Waking up and going to bed at the same time
every day helps to basically regulate your
body’s internal clock so that it “expects”
sleep at a certain time each night, and this
will decrease the amount of time that it takes
you to fall asleep as well as improve your
overall sleep quality.
So, I know that this won’t be possible for
some people because of varying hours for things
like work and school, but just do the best
you can to set a schedule and stick to it
as closely as you can, and that includes the
weekends as well.
Bodybuilding Sleep Tip #2 is to associate
your bed with sleep and sex only.
So if you have some late-night work to finish
or if you need to complete some other type
of “mind stimulating” activity, then work
on it at a desk or on the couch or anywhere
else that you can.
What you don’t want to do though is merge
your sleeping space and your working space
into the same area, because when you go to
bed you want your body to associate that specific
place with relaxation and pleasure rather
than stress and problem-solving.
Bodybuilding Sleep Tip #3 is to cut off all
electronics 30-60 minutes before bed.
So that includes television, smartphones,
laptops etc., the reason being that bright
light supresses melatonin production, which
as you probably already know is a key hormone
that regulates sleep.
So instead of watching TV, or texting or watching
youtube videos like this one, spend that 30-60
minute block doing some light reading, listening
to an audiobook or using a relaxation technique
such as meditation, which is actually a topic
that I plan to cover in a future video, because,
meditation is something that I do highly recommend
to most people.
Bodybuilding Sleep Tip #4 is to avoid going
to bed too full or too hungry.
This one will vary from person to person,
but as a general rule, you’ll be best off
to avoid going to sleep on too full or too
empty a stomach.
A small to medium sized meal within a few
hours of going to bed will allow you to sleep
more comfortably, and the insulin release
will also improve melatonin production as
well.
Bodybuilding Sleep Tip #5 is to keep your
room cool, dark and quiet.
So, keep your room at a cool temperature of
between 60-67 degrees.
Use blackout curtains or a sleeping mask to
eliminate as much light as possible.
And get rid of sudden background noises by
either sleeping in a completely quiet room,
using ear plugs, or using white noise from
a fan, a humidifier, or some other type of
white noise machine.
Bodybuilding Sleep Tip #6 is to avoid caffeine
and other stimulants within 6-8 hours of sleep.
So even if you do happen to fall asleep just
fine after an evening cup of coffee or a pre-workout
drink, the caffeine and the other stimulants
they contain can still decrease your overall
quality of sleep.
So if you want to fall asleep as easily as
possible and stay asleep, then cut off all
stimulants by the late afternoon.
And bodybuilding Sleep Tip #7 is to include
some basic sleep supplements in your overall
plan.
Now I did an entire video dedicated to this
topic a few months ago and I’ll link it
in the description box below if you want to
check it out, but just very briefly, if you
do have all of the points that I just talked
about covered and you still want some extra
help to improve your sleep, then my recommendation
would be, first off, magnesium, which is heavily
involved in regulating sleep, but gets depleted
through sweat.
The dosage for that is 200-400mg per day with
a meal, either in the form of magnesium gluconate,
diglycinate or citrate.
The second supplement is lavender oil which
helps to reduce anxiety and put the body into
a more relaxed state.
The dosage there is 80mg half an hour before
bed, and I’d recommend taking it in pill
form to make sure that you get the right dosage.
And a good product for that is called “Calm
Aid” and I’ll link that in the description
box below as well.
And finally is, melatonin, and the standard
dosage for that is 1-3mg half an hour before
bed, and you’ll be best off to start off
on the low end and just gradually increase
until you find the right dosage for yourself.
So, those are the 7 tips, regular weight training
and cardio is obviously a very important one,
so, just maintaining a regular exercise schedule
in general, but unless you don’t even lift,
then you’re already following this tip anyway
so I didn’t think it was really necessary
to go into detail there.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found these sleeping tips useful.
For more science-based, no B.S tips to help
optimize your muscle building and fat burning
progress along with concrete step by step
training, nutrition and supplement plans that
you can follow, make sure to head over to
BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab my complete
“Body Transformation Blueprint” System
by clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.