One of the primary ways muscles seem to grow  
is via an increase in the cross-sectional 
area of their muscle fibers.
There are 3 underlying ways a muscle fiber 
can increase in cross-sectional area:  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, and myofibrillar packing.
As we have done previously,  
when overviewing the evidence on these 3 
underlying ways of muscle fiber growth,  
there is a good deal of evidence finding both 
myofibrillar hypertrophy and myofibrillar packing.
In this video,  
we'll be going into some depth on the science 
of myofibrillar hypertrophy and packing.
As a brief review, and for those who haven't seen 
the previous videos, let us first establish what  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, myofibrillar packing, 
as well as sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, are.
Muscles are organized in hierarchical layers.
Within the whole muscle are 
fascicles, within fascicles  
are muscle fibers, and within 
muscle fibers are myofibrils.
Myofibrils are where the magic 
of muscle contraction happens,  
they consist of an array of sarcomeres.
Sarcomeres are what generate muscle force.
Specifically, when something called the myosin 
head extends from the myosin filament and pulls  
on something called the actin filament 
towards the M-line, force is generated.
To review the 3 underlying 
ways of muscle fiber growth,  
we need to return to the muscle fiber level.
As noted, muscle fibers contain myofibrils, which 
are what generate force via their sarcomeres.
Everything else within the muscle 
fiber can be considered the sarcoplasm.
The sarcoplasm largely consists of water but 
also contains other components, such as glycogen,  
sarcoplasmic proteins, and 
non-contractile organelles.
Myofibrillar hypertrophy is where the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm grow at the same pace,  
meaning the relative space taken up by the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm remains the same.
Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is where the sarcoplasm 
grows at a greater pace than the myofibrils,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the sarcoplasm becomes greater.
Myofibrillar packing is where the myofibrils 
grow at a greater pace than the sarcoplasm,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the myofibrils becomes greater.
As we can see, central to both myofibrillar 
hypertrophy and myofibrillar packing  
is the growth of the myofibrils, and this 
is what we'll be exploring in this video.
Specifically, how do myofibrils grow, and can 
you train for a certain type of myofibril growth?
Myofibrils can grow in three different ways:  
by increasing in length, increasing in 
cross-sectional area, or increasing in number.
Let us first explore how 
myofibrils may increase in length.
Firstly, for those who've seen the 1st 
video of this muscle growth series,  
we described how an increase in myofibril length  
ultimately can lead to an increase 
in whole muscle cross-sectional area.
Let us quickly review what was said.
There is a good deal of evidence that  
resistance training can increase 
the length of fascicles in humans.
Provided fascicles run the 
length of a whole muscle,  
an increase in their length would 
increase whole muscle length.
However, given whole muscles are attached 
to bones, and these attachment locations do  
not change, we never visually witness 
an increase in whole muscle length.
Rather, due to the fixed attachment locations,  
the longer muscle would bulge outwards, and 
this is an increase in cross-sectional area.
Now, this increase in whole muscle length is 
caused by an increase in fascicle length. But,  
what causes an increase in 
fascicle length in the first place?
Well, given muscle fibers 
are found within fascicles,  
an increase in muscle fiber length 
seems the most likely explanation.
At the muscle fiber level, we know myofibrils 
are present, and as we'll get on to in a second,  
myofibrils likely increase in length.
Along with this increase in myofibril 
length, although I believe there's  
no concrete evidence on it, presumably 
the sarcoplasm would expand lengthwise  
to support this myofibril length increase, thereby 
cementing an increase in muscle fiber length.
Given the myofibrils and 
sarcoplasm grow lengthwise  
at the same pace, it could technically 
be considered myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
hence why I've included an increase 
in myofibril length in this video.
Anyway, returning our focus 
on the myofibril component,  
how would myofibrils increase in length?
As we know, myofibrils consist 
of an array of sarcomeres.
In theory, myofibrils could increase in length via 
increasing the length of pre-existing sarcomeres,  
or by increasing the number 
of sarcomeres in series.
When overviewing the animal research, 
the overwhelming evidence suggests  
that increasing the number 
of sarcomeres in series,  
not an increase in pre-existing sarcomere length, 
occurs with an increase in myofibril length.
Note, I did say animal studies. Unfortunately,  
I don't believe there are any studies exploring 
changes at the myofibril level in humans.
Largely, this is likely due to methodological and 
practical constraints of assessing ultrastructural  
changes with human subjects, hence we 
are relying on non-human animal studies.
This is a limitation that should be 
considered throughout this video.
But, the finding that increasing 
the number of sarcomeres in series  
is likely what creates an increase 
in myofibril length makes sense.
If you were to chronically increase 
the length of pre-existing sarcomeres,  
especially to a high degree, their ability 
to produce force is most likely compromised,  
and so this mechanism seems unlikely.
Now, an interesting question is if an increase 
in the number of sarcomeres in series occurs,  
where is the sarcomere added 
along the length of the myofibril?
Some animal studies support the notion 
that the sarcomeres are simply added  
to the ends of pre-existing myofibrils. However,  
other animal studies suggest that new sarcomeres 
are inserted between pre-existing sarcomeres.
Therefore, the research is 
unfortunately not currently clear.
Another interesting question is whether you  
can specifically train to increase 
the number of sarcomeres in series.
It turns out that there may indeed 
be specific ways of training  
that predominantly induce this type of growth.
Returning to the animal studies that found an 
increase in the number of sarcomeres in series,  
nearly all of the studies stimulated 
the muscle at a long length.
Using various equipment, they either placed the 
muscle at a stretched position for a set duration  
or had the animals perform eccentric contractions.  
Eccentric contractions are where the 
muscle produces force while lengthening.
Now, the idea of simply placing 
a muscle in a stretched position  
for a set duration is likely not directly 
applicable to humans, as these studies either used  
extreme stretching training sessions or had the 
animals stretch for numerous days or weeks on end.
However, the idea of training a muscle at a 
long length, including eccentric training,  
may very well apply to humans.
For instance, McMahon et al. found that compared 
to training a range of lower body exercises  
with a partial range of motion that worked the 
muscles at a short length (specifically from 0  
to 40 degrees of knee flexion), training 
with a fuller range of motion (from 0 to  
90 degrees of knee flexion) produced greater 
increases in vastus lateralis fascicle length.
As we've established, presumably 
this increase in fascicle length  
ultimately reflects an increase in 
the number of sarcomeres in series.
Another study by McMahon et al. found that 
with knee extensions, using a partial range  
of motion that trained the quadriceps at long 
lengths (from 40 to 90 degrees of knee flexion)  
resulted in greater increases in vastus lateralis 
fascicle length compared to a partial range  
of motion that trained the quadriceps at short 
lengths (from 0 to 50 degrees of knee flexion).
Therefore, a full range of motion, or 
a partial range of motion that trains  
the muscle at long lengths, seems to 
be good at increasing fascicle length  
(and therefore presumably increasing 
the number of sarcomeres in series).
However, eccentric overload 
training may be even better.
For those unaware, your muscles are significantly 
stronger during the lowering phases of an exercise  
(in which your muscles are contracting 
eccentrically). Eccentric overload refers to  
using some method that enables you to lift heavier 
loads on the lowering phase of an exercise,  
thereby overloading the 
eccentric muscular contractions.
Reeves et al. found that compared to performing 
leg presses and knee extensions normally,  
performing them with overloaded 
eccentric repetitions only,  
produced greater increases in 
vastus lateralis fascicle length.
A few other studies also find 
that eccentric-only training  
is highly effective at increasing fascicle length.
Therefore, if you have access 
to equipment or techniques  
that allow you to perform eccentric overloaded 
reps, this could be a highly effective way to  
preferentially stimulate an increase 
in the number of sarcomeres in series.
But, quite interestingly, there is some 
evidence suggesting that your ability to  
increase the number of sarcomeres in series 
may be restricted to a certain timeframe.
Baroni et al. recruited untrained subjects and had 
them train eccentric overloaded knee extensions  
for 12 weeks. Vastus lateralis and rectus femoris 
fascicle length increased up until week 8,  
with no further increases observed thereafter.
Similarly, Blazeich et al. 
recruited untrained subjects  
and had them train knee extensions for 10 
weeks. Vastus lateralis fascicle length  
increased up until the 5th week, with no 
further increases observed thereafter.
Therefore, perhaps your ability to increase 
fascicle length (and therefore presumably increase  
the number of sarcomeres in series) may be limited 
to the first few weeks or months of training.
However, these are only two studies. Future 
research is undoubtedly still required, and  
questions still remain, for instance, in highly 
trained individuals who have never performed  
eccentric overloaded training, could 
they still experience an increase in  
the number of sarcomeres in series 
via eccentric overloaded training?
All of the mentioned eccentric overload studies 
were only conducted on untrained subjects.
Let us now move away from how 
myofibrils may increase in length,  
and progress on to how myofibrils may 
increase in cross-sectional area or number.
Firstly, it seems most likely that 
myofibrils increase in cross-sectional area  
via increasing sarcomeres in parallel. This 
suggests sarcomeres are built and added above or  
below pre-existing sarcomeres, thereby increasing 
the cross-sectional area of the myofibril.
As for an increase in myofibril number, this 
suggests that either completely new myofibrils  
are manufactured and added to muscle fibers, 
or pre-existing myofibrils split into two.
So, what is the evidence for either of these?
It's very well established in human studies that 
muscle fibers increase in cross-sectional area  
in response to resistance training.
And as detailed last video, there is a 
good deal of evidence this fiber growth  
can be achieved by myofibrillar 
hypertrophy or myofibrillar packing.
As we know, both of these involve 
significant myofibril growth.
This growth of the myofibrils could be 
achieved by an increase in cross-sectional  
area of the individual myofibrils, or by 
an increase in the number of myofibrils.
However, which one actually takes place?
Unfortunately, I don't believe there 
are any human studies exploring this.
Again, this is likely due to methodological 
and practical constraints of assessing  
ultrastructural changes within human subjects, 
hence we are relying on animal studies.
Surprisingly, even with animal studies, there 
appears to be very little research in this area.
By my count, there seem to be only 
2 relevant collections of research.
Ashmore and Summers conducted a few 
experiments exploring the effects  
of overloading the muscles of chickens, 
via stretching their wings for 1 week.
They found this procedure induced a 55% 
increase in muscle fiber cross-sectional area,  
and in a different experiment, an increase 
in the diameter of myofibrils by 36%.  
Moreover, 45% of the myofibrils 
displayed signs of splitting.
Therefore, this study suggests with an 
increase in muscle fiber cross-sectional area,  
myofibrils increase in diameter (which 
implies an increase in cross-sectional area,  
presumably through an increase 
in sarcomeres in parallel)  
AND pre-existing myofibrils may also split, as 
numerous myofibrils displayed signs of this.
Research by Goldspink further 
support these findings.
Goldspink found that in mice of various ages, 
there was a positive relationship between  
the diameter of individual myofibrils 
and muscle fiber cross-sectional area.
As a larger myofibril diameter suggests 
a larger myofibril cross-sectional area,  
this data supports the notion that myofibrils  
may increase in cross-sectional area as muscle 
fibers increase in cross-sectional area.
However, Goldspink also found 
a similar positive relationship  
between the number of myofibrils in a muscle 
fiber and the muscle fiber's cross-sectional area.
Therefore, it seems that myofibrils  
may also increase in number as the muscle 
fiber increases in cross-sectional area.
Further work by Goldspink indicated 
that the increase in myofibril number  
was likely due to the splitting 
of pre-existing myofibrils.
Specifically, and quite fascinatingly, 
Goldspink put forth the idea  
that individual myofibrils may increase in 
cross-sectional area (via an increase in  
sarcomeres in parallel) up to a certain critical 
size. Thereafter, this myofibril splits into two.
Supporting this was that Goldspink  
observed splitting in myofibrils roughly twice 
the size of myofibrils that were not splitting.
To add some more detail, at the myofibril 
level, Goldspink's research supports the idea  
that myofibrils would split longitudinally, 
via a break at the Z-discs of sarcomeres.
So collectively the studies by Ashmore, Summers, 
and Goldspink suggest that with an increase in  
muscle fiber cross-sectional area, an increase in 
the cross-sectional area of individual myofibrils  
(likely via an increase in sarcomere 
in parallel), as well as an increase in  
myofibril number ( likely via splitting 
of pre-existing myofibrils), occurs.
At the moment, there appears to be no research  
suggesting completely new myofibrils can 
be created and added to muscle fibers.
Let us move on to the intriguing question 
of whether you can train specifically  
for an increase in myofibril 
cross-sectional area or number.
Given the current evidence suggests an increase 
in myofibril cross-sectional area and number  
may both occur and may be linked (as 
suggested by Goldsprink's research),  
we'll consider them as one.
Overall, opposed to the research on 
how you may increase myofibril length,  
the current research does not 
seem to provide any clear details  
behind how you may specifically target an increase 
in myofibril cross-sectional area or number.
Despite this, we still could draw 
some potential conclusions indirectly.
As we saw in the 2nd video 
of this muscle growth series,  
there's a good deal of evidence supporting 
the notion that an increase in muscle fiber  
cross-sectional area is achieved via 
myofibrillar hypertrophy or packing,  
suggesting a significant increase in 
myofibril cross-sectional area and/or number.
The large majority of the studies finding this  
used moderate loadings, moderate 
frequencies, and low to moderate volumes.
The definitions for each of 
these can be seen on screen.
Therefore, one could suggest that 
training with these variables  
may optimize an increase in myofibril 
cross-sectional area and/or number.
However, I should mention the majority 
of studies that found sarcoplasmic  
hypertrophy (that is, greater growth of 
the sarcoplasm compared to the myofibrils)  
also used moderate loads and moderate frequencies.
Thus, these variables may not be tied to 
myofibrillar hypertrophy or myofibrillar packing.
On the other hand, though, the majority of 
the studies finding sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
used higher volumes.
From this, we can perhaps deduce  
using low to moderate volumes produces 
myofibrillar hypertrophy or packing.
and of course, both of these involve 
significant growth of the myofibrils.
Now, it's important to emphasize 
these suggestions are tentative,  
there are potential limitations with them.
One noteworthy point is that there's 
currently a lack of research exploring  
the exclusive use of heavy or light loads on 
the 3 underlying ways of muscle fiber growth.
Therefore, it remains possible 
that either heavy or light loads  
could preferentially elicit 
myofibrillar hypertrophy or packing.
All in all, future research would be needed 
to provide greater clarity in this area.
Next video, we'll be taking a closer look 
into sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, which is where,  
at the muscle fiber level, the sarcoplasm 
grows at a greater pace than the myofibrils.
We'll go into more details about how you may train 
for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, what specifically  
may drive sarcoplasm growth, the potential 
hypotheses as to why sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
may occur, as well as the potential role anabolic 
steroids may play in sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.