Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
SeanNal.com and BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video I want to discuss ideal
workout length.
So what is the optimal time frame for an effective
workout session from the time you begin your
first set until you complete your last one?
Is it 45 minutes?
Is it an hour 15?
2 hours?
Well, the truth here is that there really
is no single “best” answer.
The simple guideline that I would give here
is that your workout can last as long as you
need it to as long as your overall training
intensity, your energy and your mental focus
has not significantly declined.
When your workout length begins drifting farther
and farther into the upper ranges, your mental
drive and your physical performance will begin
to steadily decrease, and this has two main
consequences.
First off, the specific exercises that you
perform towards the end of your workout are
not going to be executed with optimal focus
and intensity and this will negatively affect
the stimulation of whichever muscles you’re
attempting to train.
And secondly, because your overall focus has
dropped, you may also be increasing your chances
of injury due to less than perfect form as
you become increasingly fatigued.
So, it’s impossible to put an exact time
frame on when this will actually become a
practical concern, because it's going to be
affected by several factors.
The first is what type of workout you're doing.
An all-out leg workout consisting of squats
and leg presses and romanian deadlifts is
going to take a lot more out of you than a
moderate intensity bicep and tricep workout.
So, the specific muscles that you’re training
and the particular exercises that you’re
performing will play a huge role in how long
you can effectively sustain your strength
and your energy levels.
Another factor is nutrition.
The consistency of your diet in the 12 to
24 hour period prior leading up to your workout
can have quite a measurable impact as well.
So if you ate poorly the previous day and
in the hours leading up to your session then
you can expect a drop in your overall performance,
and vice versa.
Thirdly is your individual fitness level.
So some people are simply more well-adapted
to weight training due to their experience
level and their individual genetics, and this
affects how long they’re able to effectively
train for.
Another factor is your mood and motivation.
So, your mind plays a huge role in the outcome
of our workouts and in pretty much everything
else that you do in your life and if for whatever
reason you’re feeling particularly pumped
up and motivated to lift on a given day then
you’ll likely be able to train effectively
for longer periods.
And a final factor is supplementation.
When taken half an hour or 45 minutes before
your session, a select few pre-workout supplements
can give you the extra mental focus and the
strength that is needed to continue your workout
for an extended period of time if necessary.
And you can get my complete muscle building
and fat loss supplementation guide in the
description box below if you're interested.
So, because of all the potential factors that
come into play, there’s really no necessity
to put a specific time frame on your workouts
in terms of minimum and maximum length.
For most people in most situations, you’re
probably going to be looking at a workout
lasting anywhere in the range of 45 minutes
probably up to about 90 minutes from the time
that you perform your first working set until
the completion of your final working set.
This excludes your warmups.
This is just an estimate, however, but in
any case, don’t obsess over the specific
time frame of your workouts.
Just make sure that, number 1, you’re getting
all of the necessary work done.
Number 2, you’re not taking any more rest
in between sets than is absolutely necessary,
and number 3, that you’re able to maintain
a high level of focus, strength and intensity
all the way through in order to effectively
stimulate your muscles and maintain proper
form at all times.
So thanks alot for watching this video lesson.
If you did find the information useful here
today please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up to
date on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.