Failure is defined as the inability to perform 
another full repetition of an exercise.
How close an individual gets to failure 
with their repetitions is probably one  
of the more hotly debated training variables.
Some propose achieving failure is 
critical for muscle hypertrophy,  
as it ensures maximal muscle fiber 
recruitment and force production.
In this video, we'll assess the soundness 
of this claim via the current training  
to failure literature as well as the 
mechanistic research on muscle hypertrophy.
Kicking things off, 4 well-designed 
papers have compared training to  
failure to stopping a couple of reps 
shy of failure for muscle hypertrophy.
Let's briefly overview them.
A 2018 Brazillian study by Lacerda et al. had 10 
previously untrained men train the unilateral leg  
extension for 3-4 sets with a 55-60% one-rep 
max load, 2-3 times per week for 14 weeks.
With one leg, subjects performed their 
repetitions to failure every set.
With their other leg, they ended up stopping 
2 reps away from failure in the first set in  
a session, 1 rep away from failure in the second 
set, and 0 reps away from failure in the last set.
By the end of the study, increases in rectus 
femoris and vastus lateralis cross-sectional area  
were similar between both legs, 
suggesting stopping 2-0 reps away  
from failure is as effective as 
training to failure for growth.
The second study by Nobrega et 
al., conducted in Brazil in 2017,  
allocated each leg of 32 previously untrained men 
into one of four conditions: a high load failure,  
high load non-failure, low load failure, 
and low load non-failure condition.
All four conditions involved training the 
unilateral leg extension for 3 sets per session,  
twice per week for 12 weeks.
The high load failure condition 
involved performing repetitions  
to failure every set with an 80% one-rep max load.
The high load non-failure condition, also with 
an 80% one-rep max load, involved performing  
repetitions to just before they felt they were 
going to fail. Based on the data provided,  
it's likely this ended up being 1 to 3 
repetitions away from failure per set.
The low load failure condition 
involved performing repetitions  
to failure every set with a 30% one-rep max load.
The low load nonfailure condition, 
with a 30% one-rep max load,  
involved performing repetitions to just 
before they felt they were going to fail.  
Again, this likely ended up being 1 to 
3 repetitions away from failure per set.
By the end of the study, increases in vastus 
lateralis cross-sectional area were similar  
between all four conditions, indicating regardless 
if an 80% or 30% one-rep max load is used,  
stopping 3 to 1 reps away from failure is no less 
effective than training to failure for growth.
As a separate point, it's worth noting this 
Nobrega study nicely demonstrates a point we've  
covered in other videos, that loads as light as 
30% one-rep max can build muscle very effectively.
Moving on to the third paper, a 2015 
Australian study by Sampson & Groeller  
had 28 previously untrained men 
perform a bicep curling-like exercise  
for 4 sets with an 85% one-rep max 
load, three times per week for 12 weeks.
One group of subjects performed all their 
sets with repetitions to failure with a  
2-second lifting and 2-second lowering speed. 
This group ended up averaging 6 reps per set.
A second group performed only 
4 repetitions per set with a  
2-second lowering and maximal lifting 
speed. Based on the numbers provided,  
this group would have been an average of 
2 repetitions away from failure each set.
A third group also performed 
only 4 repetitions per set,  
but they used a maximal lowering 
and maximal lifting speed.  
This group would have also been an average 
of 2 repetitions away from failure each set.
Although not major, there are some 
slight limitations with this study.
As you likely noticed, the three different 
groups used different repetition speeds,  
which is potentially confounding. However, 
as described in our time under tension video,  
individual repetition speeds between 0.5-8 seconds 
appear similarly effective for muscle growth,  
so the use of different repetition speeds in 
this study is probably not a major concern.
Also, groups two and three, who both stopped 
roughly 2 reps away from failure each set,  
actually performed an additional one 
set of repetitions to failure each week.  
However, I doubt this would 
significantly impact the outcomes.
Anyway, by the end of the study, increases in 
elbow flexor cross-sectional area (consisting  
of the biceps and brachialis) were 
similar between all three groups,  
suggesting stopping 2 reps away from failure can 
be comparably effective to training to failure.
As a small summary thus far, these three 
studies overviewed indicate stopping 3  
or fewer repetitions from failure can be 
equivalently effective for building muscle  
versus training to failure.
However, all three of these studies were 
conducted on previously untrained individuals.  
One could suggest these results should be expected 
in untrained individuals, as they would be highly  
responsive regardless of how close they get to 
failure with their repetitions on an exercise.  
They may suggest that different results 
may arise in trained individuals.
Fortunately, the fourth paper, a 2020 Brazillian 
study by Santanielo et al. was conducted on 14 men  
with an average of 5.1 years of 
training experience. They had an  
average body weight of 74.4kg and could leg 
press an average of 237.5kg before the study.
Subjects trained both the unilateral 
leg press and unilateral leg extension,  
twice per week for 10 weeks.
A great thing about this study was the 
researcher's individualized set numbers.  
More precisely, the researchers noted how many 
sets per week the subjects performed for the  
quadriceps before the study, and then the subjects 
performed 20% more for the study's duration.
For example, if a subject performed 15 weekly 
sets for the quadriceps before the study,  
they performed 18 weekly sets (a 20% 
increase) for the quadriceps in this study.  
These 18 weekly sets were equally divided 
between the leg press and leg extension.
With one leg, subjects performed 
every set with repetitions to failure.
With their other leg, they performed every 
set with repetitions to a point before  
failure. The data provided suggest 
they mostly ended up stopping their  
sets around 3 to 1 repetitions away from failure.
By the end of the study, increases in vastus 
lateralis cross-sectional area were similar  
between both legs, suggesting stopping 3 
to 1 repetitions away from failure is still  
similarly effective to training 
to failure in trained individuals.
So, considering the totality of the current 
literature, it appears in previously untrained  
and trained individuals, training to failure 
is not a must. Stopping 3 to 1 repetitions  
away from failure appears equivalently 
capable of eliciting muscle hypertrophy.
Indeed, these results make sense mechanistically.
Mechanical tension is currently the 
best-categorized stimulus for muscle hypertrophy,  
and it's quite likely stopping 3 
to 1 repetitions away from failure  
elicits sufficient mechanical tension levels.
Let me explain.
Mechanical tension is equal to the 
force generated by muscle fibers.
Components within muscle 
fibers, called mechanosensors,  
detect forces produced by the muscle fiber and 
transduces these forces into a signaling cascade  
that results in muscle protein synthesis (which 
are the proteins that make our muscles bigger).
It's worth exploring the concept of 
motor units to further understand  
overall mechanical tension and why 
training to failure may not be necessary.
A motor unit refers to a single motor neuron 
and the multiple muscle fibers it innervates.  
When the single motor neuron sends an electrical 
signal through to the muscle fibers it innervates,  
those muscle fibers produce force.
Within a whole muscle, a variety of motor 
units with different characteristics exist.
In general, these characteristics 
likely lie across a spectrum,  
with low threshold motor units on one end, and 
high threshold motor units on the other end.
Typically, a low-threshold motor unit consists of 
a small motor neuron that innervates slow-twitch  
muscle fibers that produce low amounts of force 
but are highly fatigue resistant. Due to this,  
low-threshold motor units are described as 
highly fatigue resistant but low force-producing.
A high-threshold motor unit generally consists of 
a large motor neuron that innervates fast-twitch  
muscle fibers that produce high amounts of 
force but are highly fatigable. Therefore,  
high-threshold motor units are described 
as high-force producing but very fatigable.
For maximizing overall mechanical tension (and 
thus the stimulus for overall muscle growth),  
we'd want to recruit as many motor 
units as possible during an exercise  
(from the low-threshold motor units all the 
way up to the high-threshold motor units).
Furthermore, we'd likely want the individual 
motor units to produce at least decent degrees  
of their respective force capacities for a fair 
duration. The precise details of this will differ  
depending on the motor unit in question. Remember, 
low-threshold motor units have overall low-force  
producing capacities but can sustain these forces 
for a long time. Conversely, high-threshold motor  
units have overall high-force producing capacities 
but cannot sustain these forces for very long.
Here's the main points:
Firstly, It's not clear when you 
reach maximal motor unit recruitment,  
and the motor unit literature indicates 
this can differ between muscles.
However, the literature indicates this is 
likely achieved a fair while before failure.
For instance, one study suggests maximal 
motor unit recruitment for the shoulder  
and trap muscles may be obtained 
3-5 repetitions before failure.
Secondly, by the time you've reached failure,  
it's quite likely many motor units 
(particularly the high-threshold motor units)  
are past producing their highest 
forces and are instead just fatiguing.
Remember, it's tension (analogous to force)  
that's categorized as a prime stimulus for muscle 
hypertrophy. The idea that more motor unit fatigue  
is beneficial for muscle hypertrophy is 
not supported by the current literature.
A motor unit modeling study by Potvin and 
Fuglevand demonstrates our points nicely.
Their model included 7 different motor 
units, ordered in terms of thresholds.
Motor unit 1 was the lowest threshold motor unit,  
while motor unit 120 was the 
highest threshold motor unit.
The graph on-screen depicts the 
contribution of each motor unit to a 50%  
maximal isometric contraction held until failure. 
The total contraction lasted 100 seconds.
Except for motor unit 120, all of the other motor  
units were recruited from 
the onset of contraction.
Motor units 1, 20, 40, and 60 produced steady low 
forces throughout the full contraction duration.  
This makes sense, these would be 
considered the low-threshold motor units  
(which produce low forces but 
are highly fatigue resistant).
Motor unit 80, a higher-threshold motor 
unit, produced its most force for the  
set at the start of the contraction, 
where it thereafter gradually fatigued.
Motor unit 100, a higher-threshold motor 
unit, continued to increase its force  
contribution up until the 65-second 
mark, and thereafter began to fatigue.
Motor unit 120, the highest-threshold motor 
unit, was recruited at the 70-ish second mark,  
and steeply increased its force contribution 
up until the 95-ish second mark,  
where it then steeply fatigued.
This data demonstrates motor unit recruitment,  
as well as the maintenance of at least decent 
amounts of respective force production from  
the individual motor units, is achieved 
before failure. At the point of failure,  
no additional motor units nor enhancements 
in individual motor units force occurred.
This probably explains why 
training 3 to 1 repetitions  
away from failure is sufficient for muscle growth.
I should restate this data was from 
modeling isometric contractions.
Recruitment patterns and strategies 
likely differ between isometric  
and the isotonic contractions that 
occur during your typical exercises.
However, I'm unaware of any reason to 
believe that the main point (that failure  
offers no additional motor unit recruitment or 
enhancements in individual motor units force)  
would not also be the same 
with isotonic contractions.
In summary, the current literature, 
as well as mechanistic rationale,  
likely indicate stopping 3 to 
1 repetitions away from failure  
is similarly effective to training 
to failure for muscle hypertrophy.
Now, some may be thinking in the real world,  
away from the laboratory in which 
researchers can verify proximity to failure,  
an individual may not actually be able to 
accurately estimate how close to failure they are.
For example, an individual may think they've 
stopped 3 repetitions away from failure,  
but in actuality, they may have been 5 or 
even more repetitions away from failure.
This is a very solid point. In the next video, 
we'll explore some interesting recent research  
that can help an individual become more accurate 
at predicting how far from failure they are.
In the video after that,  
we'll be exploring something that many may have 
been thinking about throughout this video. That  
is, could stopping more than 3 repetitions away 
from failure still optimize muscle hypertrophy?
Specifically, there's some really 
intriguing velocity-based research  
that potentially indicates, 
under certain conditions,  
training farther than 3 repetitions away 
from failure could optimize hypertrophy.