I recently came across some research exploring if 
heavy and light loads produce different regional  
muscle growth. Put differently, could heavy and 
light loads result in different growth on parts  
of a muscle? If true, this may suggest that using 
both heavy and light loads in your training  
could be effective for ensuring you experience 
more balanced muscle growth across a muscle  
or a muscle group. As mentioned in other videos, we 
have two meta-analyses indicating loads between  
30% and 85% of a person's one rep max on 
an exercise can produce similar muscle growth,  
provided you perform repetitions to or very 
close to failure. The point at which no more  
repetitions can be performed. Meta-analyses, for 
those unaware, are studies that combine the results  
of numerous individual studies. But in nearly all 
of the studies in the mentioned meta-analyses, 
they measured muscle growth at only one region 
of a muscle, preventing us from identifying if any  
regional differences in muscle growth between 
heavy and light loads exists. Likewise, we've  
previously explored the research assessing 
if alternating rep ranges in your program  
,so using a variety of loads, could produce greater 
muscle growth than using only one rep range.  
In the short term at least, 12 weeks or less, there 
appeared to be no difference between the two. But  
all the research explored in that video assessed 
muscle growth at only one region of a muscle,  
again preventing us from knowing if any regional 
differences in muscle growth exist between using  
a variety of loads or training with only one load. 
So, could heavy and light loads produce different  
regional muscle growth? The study I came across 
was a 1996 paper by his Hisaeda and colleagues.  
11 untrained women were assigned to a hypertrophy 
or strength group. Both groups trained the leg  
extension, 3 times per week for 8 weeks. The 
hypertrophy group performed their leg extensions  
with a 2 second concentric phase and a 2 
second eccentric phase. Each session. they performed  
5 to 6 sets of 15 to 20 reps to failure with 
90 seconds of rest between sets. The strength group  
performed the concentric and eccentric phases 
of the leg extension as fast as possible. Each  
session, they performed 8 to 9 sets of 
4 to 5 reps to failure. They rested however  
long they needed between sets. Cross-sectional 
area of the rectus femoris, vastus lateralis  
vastus medialis, and vastus intermedius was each 
measured at 30%, 50%, and 705 of the thigh  
length. For each of those muscle heads, the sum of 
those three regions was used in the analysis. Also,  
the values obtained for each head were added up 
to give us total quadriceps cross-sectional area.  
Total quadriceps cross-sectional area increases 
were similar between both groups. However,  
looking at which heads actually grew for each 
group, the hypertrophy group experienced greater  
growth of the vastus lateralis, while the 
strength group experienced greater growth  
of the vastus intermedius and rectus femoris. As 
mentioned, the authors of the study added up the  
cross-sectional area increases for each quadriceps 
head at 30, 50, and 70% of the thigh length  
and used that value for analysis. They did 
not report the data for cross-sectional area  
increases at each of those percentage regions. 
That said, they did state the hypertrophy group  
experienced significant cross-sectional area 
increases at 305 of the thigh length, so the  
upper regions, while the strength group experienced 
significant increases at 70% of the thigh length  
.so the lower regions. However i don't know whether 
this applies to only one of the quadriceps heads  
or all of them. They unfortunately did not go 
into further details. Nevertheless, this study  
indicates with leg extensions, performing 15 to 
20 reps, which of course requires a light load,  
targets the vastus lateralis more than the other 
quadriceps heads , while performing 4-5 reps, which  
of course requires a heavy load, targets the 
rectus femoris and vastus intermedius more.  
Furthermore, lighter loads may target the 
upper regions of some quadriceps heads more,  
while heavier loads may target the lower 
regions more. Now, this study is not without  
noteworthy limitations. In addition to performing 
a different number of reps on the leg extension  
both groups also used a different 
number of sets, rest interval lengths,  
and repetition tempos. These could have influenced 
the results. The use of different repetition  
tempos is likely a noteworthy consideration. In 
a previous video, we demonstrated some evidence  
indicates different repetition tempos can produce 
different regional muscle growth. Therefore, the  
results could have nothing to do with rep ranges 
or loading rather all to do with repetition tempo.  
However, is there any rational reason behind 
why heavy and light loads may cause different  
regional muscle growth? One such reason relates 
to muscle fiber types. Muscles generally consist  
of slow twitch and fast twitch fibers. Slow 
twitch fibers produce low amounts of power  
but are highly fatigue resistant, whereas fast 
twitch fibers produce high amounts of power but  
are less fatigue resistant. These characteristics 
bring up an interesting hypothesis. When using  
heavy loads, could the body selectively recruit 
muscle heads or regions that are more fast twitch?  
Conversely, when using light loads, could the body 
selectively recruit muscle heads or regions that  
are more slow twitch? Based on a few studies, the 
vastus intermedius, but more so the rectus femoris,  
appear to be slightly more fast twitch than slow 
twitch. Could this explain why the strength group  
,who used heavy loads, experienced greater growth of 
these heads? The vastus lateralis, on the other hand,  
is slightly less fast twitch than these muscles. 
Based on numerous studies, it appears to be a
near 50/50 split of fast and slow twitch muscle 
fibers. Could this explain why the hypertrophy  
group, who use lighter loads, experienced greater 
growth of this head? Also, remember, the researchers  
broadly stated the hypertrophy group experienced 
greater upper region growth while the strength  
group experienced greater lower region growth. In 
most studies that aim to identify the fiber type  
composition of a muscle. They take a tissue 
sample from only one region of that muscle  
and then calculate the number of slow and 
fast switch fibers from that single region.  
But there is research indicating that when taking 
numerous samples from many regions of a muscle,  
the fiber type composition varies between them. 
This might help explain why the hypertrophy and  
strength group experienced different growth in 
the upper and lower regions of the quadriceps.  
As an extra note, if this hypothesis was true, it could also apply to repetition tempo. Slower  
repetition tempos may selectively recruit muscle 
heads or regions that are more slow twitch, while  
faster repetition tempos may selectively recruit 
muscle regions or heads that are more fast twitch.  
But all of this is only a hypothesis 
and it does have problems with it.  
The strength group experienced slightly greater 
growth of the vastus intermedius than the rectus  
femoris. However, the current research indicates 
the rectus femoris is slightly more fast twitch  
than the vastus intermedius. If this fiber type 
hypothesis was true, we would expect the rectus  
femoris to have grown more than the vastus 
intermedius. But this wasn't the case. Furthermore,  
the hypertrophy group experienced the greatest 
growth of the vastus lateralis. However, the current  
evidence indicates the vastus medialis is more 
slow twitch than the vastus lateralis. If this  
fiber-type hypothesis was true, we would expect 
the vastus medialis to have grown more than the  
vastus lateralis, but this wasn't the case. Moving 
on, as far as i'm aware, the study by Hisaeda and  
colleagues is the only paper to have explored 
differences in regional muscle growth between  
heavy and light load traditional training. Now, I
say traditional training for a reason. In this case,  
traditional training refers to performing 
exercises that involve both a concentric  
and eccentric phase. Many common exercises, such 
as squat,  bench presses, and leg extensions  
fit into this criteria. However, there is a study 
exploring how heavy and light isometric trading  
impacts regional muscle growth.12 untrained 
men were assigned to a 100% or a 60  
% group. Both groups performed an isometric 
contraction for their triceps at 90 degrees of  
elbow flexion with a dynamometer 3 times per 
week for 10 weeks. The 100% group contracted their  
triceps to 100% of their force producing 
abilities for 12 sets of 6 seconds each session.  
The 60 group contracted their triceps at 60% of 
their force producing abilities for 4 sets of 30  
seconds each session. Triceps cross-sectional 
area was measured at 20 regions across the  
length of the muscle. Increases at all regions were 
similar between both groups. The graph combines the  
data for both groups and displays the average 
increase at all 20 regions across the triceps.  
So this study indicates heavy and light loads 
do not produce different regional muscle growth.  
But there are some important considerations with 
this study. Firstly, isometric contractions were  
used. If both groups performed dynamic exercises 
that involved concentric and eccentric phases,  
we don't know how this would impact the results. 
Also, although the researchers looked at numerous  
regions across the length of the triceps, they 
did not distinguish between the triceps heads.  
We don't know if long, medial, and lateral head 
growth differed between the two groups. To  
summarize, the Hisaeda and colleague study provides 
us with some evidence that heavy and light loads  
may produce different regional muscle growth. 
However, the study with isometric contractions does  
provide us with some degree of opposing evidence. 
There is an interesting hypothesis, relating to  
fiber type composition, behind why heavy and light 
loads may produce different regional muscle growth.  
But as established, there are limitations to 
this hypothesis. At the end of the day, a lot  
more research is needed in this area. Although, as 
established in our alternating rep range video,  
in the short term, 12 weeks or less, using a variety 
of rep ranges, meaning you combine heavy, moderate,  
and light loads in your trading program, appears 
to produce similar muscle growth to using only  
one rep range. In the long term though, there is a 
possibility using a variety of loads is superior.  
And as demonstrated in this video, there is 
a possibility that heavy and light loads  
produce different regional growth. Meaning 
using a variety of loads would be effective  
for ensuring you experience more balanced muscle 
growth across a muscle or muscle group. Therefore.  
using a variety of loads in your training program 
could be a sensible idea. If for some reason you  
do not like the idea of using a variety of 
loads, there still are other ways to ensure  
more balanced muscle growth across a muscle 
or muscle group. As covered in another video,  
using different repetition tempos could be one way. 
Another more obvious way is to perform a variety  
of exercises for a muscle group. We'll be exploring 
this concept in more detail with future videos.