Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here of EliteImpactLabs.com,
with a muscle in minutes Q&A.
I usually refer to this Q&A as answering your
bodybuilding and fitness questions in two
minutes or less.
But I find that most of the time I have a
little bit more information that I'm trying
to cram in and it tends to go longer than
the two-minute mark.
So, I'm just going to call it, "Muscle in
Minutes" from now on.
I'm going to provide the answers as straight
to the point as I can.
But, you know, it might go a little bit over
two minutes, maybe three minutes.
But again, I'll still keep it concise and
to the point.
So, today's question is on the issue of lifting
straps.
So, whether or not lifting straps are a useful
part of a bodybuilding program, and when you
should use them.
For those of you who don't know, a set of
lifting straps are basically just a set of
straps that are wrapped around your wrists.
And then, wrapped around the bar or dumbbell
or machine to basically help you hold on to
the weight more effectively.
So, there's a couple of things to take into
account here.
The first situation is when I would consider
lifting straps mandatory.
I would consider lifting straps mandatory
on any exercise where you are lifting a weight
that's so heavy that you're not able to hold
on to it throughout the entire set.
So, that's usually going to apply to lifts
like deadlifts, or stiff legged deadlifts
or shrugs, exercises like that.
So, if you are using a weight that is so heavy
for you that -- or so heavy for your forearms
and your grip rather that you can't hold on
to the weight throughout the entire set.
Then a set of lifting strap is absolutely
mandatory, because if your grip is giving
out before your target muscles, so, if you're
performing like a set of shrugs, and your
grip is giving out before your traps are,
you're completely short-circuiting the effectiveness
of the entire exercise and you're basically
just giving yourself a really good forearm
workout.
Or if you're performing a set of deadlifts,
and your grip gives out before your legs are
get back again, the entire exercise is basically
useless, and you're really just training your
forearm.
So, in situations like that, a set of lifting
straps is definitely mandatory.
And you'll notice that they make a huge difference
in your ability to grip the weight.
And the second situation is one that I would
say is optional.
And that is for all of your upper body compound
back exercises.
So, any type of pulling exercise, chin-ups,
pull-downs or rows using a barbell, dumbbells,
machine, et cetera.
For this situation, I would say again, it's
optional.
But I do think that for most people where
the central goal is muscle hypertrophy, I
think that lifting straps are a pretty good
tool.
And I've always use them for pretty much all
of my back training, even if you are able
to grip the weight throughout the entire exercise.
And the reason for that is because most people
have a hard time contracting their lats and
the muscles of their mid-back effectively
during their back training.
Most people perform their back exercises in
a way that causes the biceps and the rear
delt to take on most of the work, which, you
know, really minimizes the amount of hypertrophy
that you can achieve in your back.
There are a variety of ways to shift more
stress on to your back muscles as opposed
to your grip.
And one of the key ways is to stop pulling
through your hands, and rather to pull through
your elbows during all of your back exercises.
And lifting straps are a great way to help
you accomplish that, because by basically
locking you into the weight, using the straps,
it eliminates your grip from the equation,
and you don't even have to think about your
hands during the exercise.
So, you're performing a set of chin-ups or
a set of rows, and it's almost like your hands
aren't even there, and all of that polling
can be done through your elbows.
And that really makes a big difference in
your ability to contract your lats and your
mid-back effectively.
So, again, I would say it's optional.
But I think for a lot of people, especially
if you're having trouble really feeling your
back during your workouts, lifting straps
are definitely a useful tool for that.
A lot of people will argue against the use
of lifting straps, basically by saying that
they're a crotch, and that it's going to negatively
affect the development of your grip strength.
But I really don't think that's a big deal.
I mean, if your goal is hypertrophy, developing
your -- it's a trade-off.
I mean, what would you rather have, bigger
lats, bigger traps, bigger rhomboids or a
better grip strength?
I mean, again, if your goal is to build muscle,
then your grip strength shouldn't really be
a huge concern.
And on top of that, you can easily incorporate
separate grip strength on top of your -- your
existing workout plans.
So, you can go, you can perform your back
workout using your straps.
Get a better back workout.
And then at the end, if you really are concerned
with grip strength, you can incorporate additional
forearm and grip strength work at the end,
anyway.
So, just to summarize lifting straps, I would
say, are mandatory.
Well, they are mandatory on any exercise where
you aren't able to hold on to the weight throughout
the entire set.
And I would say they are optional for upper
body compound back training.
Though, I think that for the majority of people,
they are a useful tool.
So, I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide, which you can grab over
on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
I appreciate all of the support.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.