Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
SeanNal.com and BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I just want to really quickly
share with you a highly effective but pretty
uncommon chest exercise that you can try adding
into your routine for something new.
Now what I like about this exercise is that
it is a compound pressing movement but it
allows for a greater range of motion in comparison
to a standard barbell press or a dumbbell
press.
Now I typically recommend that you use a basic
flat or decline dumbbell press as the primary
chest exercise in your chest workouts for
reasons that I’ve talked about many times
before, but you can try mixing in this movement
towards the middle or the end of your chest
workouts and just see how you like it.
So the exercise that I’m talking about here
is a seated cable press performed one arm
at a time.
So let me first show you a live example of
how this exercise is done just using some
light weight for demo purposes.
So it’s ultimately pretty straightforward,
you’re just going to sit against the pad
with the cable around shoulder height or just
slightly lower, I like to grab onto both cables
here so that I can use the opposite arm for
better overall stability.
And then from there you’re just going to
go ahead and perform a regular pressing motion,
but the key here is to really take advantage
of that increased range of motion by not only
pressing the cable forward but also pressing
it all the way across the front of your body
in an arching motion.
And that’s what I really like about this
particular exercise is that as far as I can
tell it lets you achieve the largest possible
range of motion for a compound pressing exercise,
because by using a cable and then performing
the movement one arm at a time, you’ll be
able to bring your upper arm further across
the front of your body in comparison to what
you'd get from other free weight exercises
while still keeping maximum tension on your
pecs since the résistance of the cable will
still be pulling your arm both back and to
the side which you can’t replicate using
free weight motions.
So you can actually test this out for yourself
right now.
Press your arm straight out in front of your
body and then contract your chest, now this
is pretty much as far as you’d get using
a barbell press, a dumbbell would take you
around here, but with the cable you can press
inward for those couple extra inches and you
should feel a deeper contraction in your chest,
almost like a cramping sensation, and that's
because your pec is being shortened to a greater
degree.
Now obviously not everybody is going to be
able to perform the single arm cable press
exactly as I’ve shown in the video because
not every gym has a seated cable press machine
available, if that is the case one thing you
can do is mimic the same basic motion by placing
a vertical free weight bench up against a
cable stand or you can even just try performing
the exercise from a standing position, though
having something to press your back against
will make the exercise reasonably more effective.
So if you have the equipment available and
you want to try something new, then give the
single arm cable chest press a go, everybody
that I’ve shown this movement to has really
liked it, and if you do let me know what you
think in the comments below.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more useful, to the point training tips
just like this one along with concrete, step
by step training, nutrition and supplement
plans that you can follow to maximize your
muscle building and your fat burning progress,
make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.