In response to resistance training, 
muscles typically increase in size.
One of the most commonly accepted and supported 
ways that this occurs is via an increase in the  
size of their individual muscle fibers. This 
whole process is called muscle hypertrophy.
However, another plausible way 
muscle could increase in size  
is through something called muscle hyperplasia.
Muscle hyperplasia refers to an increase in 
the number of muscles fibers within a muscle.
In theory, this could be achieved by completely 
new muscle fibers being manufactured,  
or by pre-existing muscle 
fibers splitting into two.
In this video, we'll thoroughly examine the 
existing research on muscle hyperplasia,  
with the primary aim of answering if 
muscle hyperplasia truly occurs in humans.
Although we'll be assessing 
human research shortly,  
animal studies are highly valuable for 
potential insights into muscle hyperplasia.
As we'll come to find out, there are major 
methodological and ethical constraints  
that limit the quality and validity 
of human research in this area.
With studies conducted on animals, these 
constraints become less of a problem.
First things first, for researchers 
to explore if muscle fiber number can  
increase, they need to train 
the animals in some form.
Commonly, this is done in one of three ways:  
stretching, synergistic 
ablation, or weight training.
Stretching involves using some piece of weighted 
equipment to stretch a muscle of an animal.
For instance, on-screen depicts 
how a study by Alway et al.  
stretched the anterior latissimus 
dorsi of Japenese quails.
Note, I did say anterior latissimus dorsi.  
Interestingly, Japenese quails also 
have a posterior latissimus dorsi.
In animal studies that use 
stretching to train the muscle,  
they either do so chronically or intermittently.
In studies that chronically stretch the animal,  
they typically stretch the muscle 
for 30 whole straight days.
Conversely, in studies that 
use intermittent stretching,  
they stretch the muscle for 1 whole 
day, followed by 2-3 days of rest.  
This cycle is repeated throughout 
the full duration of the study.
As we can see, these stretching protocols 
are extreme. Consequently, we should be  
extremely cautious in trying to extrapolate 
results from studies using this to humans.
As for synergistic ablation, 
this is undoubtedly more extreme.
It involves surgically removing 
a muscle from a muscle group,  
thereby overloading the remaining 
muscles in that muscle group.
Most commonly, this technique is used in rodents  
and involves surgically removing the 
gastrocnemius from the calf muscle group,  
thereby resulting in the soleus being 
significantly overloaded during normal tasks.
As this is method is highly extreme, 
we also need to be extremely cautious  
in trying to extrapolate results 
from studies using this to humans.
Finally, weight training involves having animals 
perform exercises in a similar way to humans.
For instance, this study by Tamaki et 
al. used a custom piece of equipment  
to get rats to squat for 15 sets of 15 
repetitions with a 65-75% one-rep max load.
As this method is substantially 
more comparable to what humans do,  
studies using this method may be considered more 
applicable to humans than the other two methods.
Okay, so now that we've established the various 
ways in which researchers can train the muscles  
of animals, let us establish how they can 
measure if muscle fiber number has increased.
There seem to be two ways of 
doing this, either via direct  
counting or counting from a cross-section.
Direct counting involves removing the whole 
muscle and counting every single muscle fiber.
Of course, this can only be performed 
once. You can't perform this method before  
and after a training duration, as once you've 
removed the muscle, it cannot be put back.
Therefore, to determine if the number 
of muscle fibers has increased,  
there are two plausible ways used.
In the first way, researchers get the 
animals to train only one side of their body,  
while their other side of 
the body remains untrained.
Then, after a training duration, if the 
number of muscle fibers in the trained muscle  
is more than the number of muscle 
fibers in the untrained muscle,  
we assume that training 
increased muscle fiber number.
The underlying assumption here is 
that before the training period,  
the trained and untrained muscles would have 
had a comparable number of muscle fibers.  
This may not always be an accurate 
assumption and is thus a limitation.
The second way involves using the direct 
counting method to compare the number of  
muscle fibers within the muscles of an animal 
that trained to an animal that did not train.
After a training duration, if the number of 
muscle fibers in the muscle of a trained animal  
is greater than the number of muscle fibers 
within the muscle of an untrained animal,  
we assume that training 
increased muscle fiber number.
The underlying assumption here is 
that before the training duration,  
the number of muscle fibers between the trained 
and untrained animals would have been similar.
Again, this may not always be an accurate 
assumption and is thus a limitation.
Now, one major advantage of this 
method is that as the whole muscle  
is removed, all of the muscle fibers are 
counted from the muscle of the animals.
However, this also makes it somewhat unpractical 
for researchers, as the dissection of a whole  
muscle and counting of potentially ten's of 
thousands of muscle fibers can be difficult.
The second method, counting from a cross-section, 
somewhat solves this impracticality.
It involves removing only a cross-section from the  
muscle and then counting the number of 
muscle fibers in this cross-section.
For practical reasons, I believe 
researchers don't take a cross-section  
from the muscle of the same animal 
before and after a training duration.
Therefore, like the last method, researchers 
either compare the number of muscle fibers  
counted between a trained side and untrained side,  
or between an animal that trained 
and an animal that didn't train.
Counting the number of muscle 
fibers in a cross-section  
is potentially more practical, 
as only a sample is required.
However, there is a vital 
limitation with this method.
It's very possible that the number 
of muscle fibers in a cross-section  
could increase without an actual 
increase in muscle fiber number.
One example of this is when an increase in 
the pennation angle of the muscle fibers  
outpaces the growth of the muscle fibers.
Let me explain.
Remember, muscles attach to bones in order 
to create movement in the human body.
A muscle has two attachment points.
Some muscles in the human body do not have 
their muscle fibers run in a straight line  
from their two points of attachment.
Rather, some muscles have their fibers angled 
slightly between the two points of attachment.
The pennation angle is the name given 
to the angle of the muscle fibers.
When assessing a particular cross-section of a 
muscle, if an increase in pennation angle outpaces  
the growth of the individual fibers, more muscle 
fibers could be observed in that cross-section,  
despite there being no actual 
increase in muscle fiber number.
Another example in where more muscle 
fibers could be observed in a cross-section  
without an actual increase in muscle fiber number 
relates to an increase in muscle fiber length.
Some muscle fibers may not actually 
run the full length of a muscle  
and with training, there is evidence 
muscle fibers can increase in length.
Therefore, when assessing a 
particular cross-section of a muscle,  
it's possible that a muscle 
fiber could increase in length  
to the point where it is now newly 
observed in that cross-section.
In general, as a result of these 
potentially vital limitations  
when counting muscle fibers from a cross-section, 
a direct count is considered more reliable.
Hopefully we've now got a solid 
understanding of how researchers can train  
and measure an increase in 
muscle fiber number in animals.
Let us now look at the results of such studies.
A meta-analysis by Kelley combined the 
results of numerous animal studies.
What the analysis found was that muscle fiber 
number increased by 20.95% in studies that had  
animals stretch, 11.59% in studies that 
had animals weight training, and 5.44%  
in studies that used synergistic ablation.
As we noted, given that studies using stretching 
or synergistic ablation are quite extreme and  
not applicable to what humans do, the weight 
training data is most relevant and insightful.
Specifically, 5 studies were comprised 
in the weight training results. 3 of them  
involved counting from cross-sections, 
while 2 involved direct counting.
All 5 of these studies found an 
increase in muscle fiber number,  
and so this includes the 2 
studies that used direct counting.
As mentioned earlier, given direct 
counting is considered more reliable  
than counting from cross-sections, 
and the 2 direct counting studies  
found an increase in muscle fiber 
number, this adds to our confidence  
muscle hyperplasia may indeed increase 
with weight training (at least in animals).
Alright, so the animal evidence seems to suggest  
that weight training-like stimuli 
may induce muscle hyperplasia.
But, results obtained from animals studies 
may not necessarily apply to humans.
Unfortunately, there are major 
ethical and practical constraints  
when attempting to find out if 
muscle hyperplasia occurs in humans.
Recall that the direct method 
of counting muscle fibers  
involves removing a whole muscle 
and counting all of the fibers.
The first major problem here is that 
I'm not too sure there are many humans  
out there willing to have one of 
their muscles completely removed.
Even if there were willing human subjects, 
and a researcher could get clearance,  
human muscles can contain hundreds 
of thousands of muscle fibers,  
making the direct counting of all 
of them extremely impractical.
For instance, it's broadly estimated 
that the biceps brachii of humans  
contains anywhere from 198,000 
to 419,000 muscle fibers.
As far as I'm aware, counting from a 
cross-section has also not been done in humans.
I think this because it's too difficult to obtain  
a large enough sample from human 
muscles to be considered valid.
Despite all of this,  
researchers have used other ways in trying to 
find out muscle hyperplasia occurs in humans.
There have been 4 cross-sectional studies 
finding potential indirect evidence  
that muscle fiber number 
may increase with training.
Specifically, these studies 
compared muscle characteristics  
between a group of trained bodybuilders or 
powerlifters to a group of untrained individuals.
As you'd expect, the bodybuilders and powerlifters  
had larger whole muscle cross-sectional 
areas than the untrained individuals.
However, the cross-sectional area 
of the individual muscle fibers  
assessed was not different between the untrained 
individuals and the bodybuilders or powerlifters.
This led the researchers to suggests that 
the greater whole muscle cross-sectional  
area observed for the bodybuilders or 
powerlifters could be due to having  
more muscle fibers that are produced by training.
However, there is still a whole 
host of problems with this.
One major one is that human 
studies can only assess the  
size of a limited number of muscle fibers.
This is because to assess the 
size of individual muscle fibers,  
a small sample must first 
be taken from the muscle.
The muscle fibers in this small sample may not be  
identical to muscle fibers 
elsewhere in the muscle.
Therefore, it's possible the muscle 
fibers in other regions of the muscle  
that were never sampled could have been 
larger in the bodybuilders or powerlifters  
compared to the untrained individuals, thereby 
explaining the larger whole muscle size.
Nevertheless, aside from these 
similar 4 cross-sectional studies,  
there is another cross-sectional 
study by Eriksson et al.  
finding potential evidence for 
muscle hyperplasia in humans.
They found that in trained powerlifters, 
there were signs of splitting  
from muscle fibers obtained from 
the vastus lateralis and trapezius.
The splits varied in depths, but the authors noted 
that some splits did completely divide the fibers.
They also assessed a group 
of untrained individuals,  
in which no splitting of muscle fibers from 
the vastus lateralis or trapezius was found.
Therefore, this study suggests the 
powerlifters may have experienced  
an increase in muscle fiber number via 
splitting of pre-existing muscle fibers.
Although the mentioned 5 cross-sectional 
studies potentially imply humans may  
experience muscle hyperplasia, other 
human studies suggest otherwise.
A study by Schantz et al. compared 5 
bodybuilders to 18 untrained individuals.
Contrary to much of the previous 
cross-sectional studies we detailed,  
the bodybuilders had a larger whole muscle AND 
larger individual fiber cross-sectional areas  
compared to the untrained individuals, suggesting 
it was the larger individual muscle fibers  
that perhaps explained the 
larger whole muscle size.
A study by MacDougall et al. found the same thing.
A group of bodybuilders had a 
larger bicep cross-sectional area  
and biceps muscle fiber cross-sectional 
area compared to untrained individuals.
Moreover, using a simple equation,  
the researchers attempted to estimate 
fiber numbers in the subjects.
What they did, for each subject, was divide 
the cross-sectional area of their biceps  
by the average cross-sectional area 
of the muscle fibers in their biceps.
The cross-sectional area of the 
biceps was corrected for any  
impact connective tissue would have had.
Therefore, the result of this equation 
would give a very rough estimate  
of how many fibers each subject 
may have had in their biceps.
Overall, the researchers found that 
the fiber numbers in the bodybuilders  
was similar to the untrained individuals,  
thus potentially suggesting muscle fiber 
numbers do not increase with training.
Finally, a study by Mccall et al.  
actually used the same equation we just 
mentioned, but in a long-term study design.
They had 8 trained men train a variety 
of free weight and machine exercises,  
each for 3 sets of repetition to failure with a 10 
rep-max load, for 3 times per week for 12 weeks.
Before and after the study, the researchers 
measured biceps cross-sectional area,  
cross-sectional area of a portion 
of muscle fibers from the biceps,  
and fiber numbers within the 
biceps via the mentioned equation.
After the 12 week training duration, 
biceps cross-sectional area and biceps  
fiber cross-sectional area increased. 
But, estimated fiber numbers did not.
So the results of this study would seem 
to suggest that muscle fiber number  
does not increase with training in humans.
However, the authors mentioned 
something quite interesting.
2 subjects experienced quite high increases in 
cross-sectional area of a few muscles fibers from  
the biceps (specifically the fast-twitch fibers), 
but they experienced similar overall increases  
in biceps cross-sectional 
area to the other 6 subjects.
In other words, it seems like 
these 2 subjects were outliers.
When these 2 subjects were removed 
from the fiber number estimated data,  
the average of the remaining 6 subjects 
did display an increase in fiber numbers.
Therefore, perhaps this study did actually 
find muscle hyperplasia in humans.
However, as with pretty much all the human studies 
we've been assessing, there are limitations.
Firstly this data is only from 6 subjects, 
which is an extremely small sample size.  
On top of this, the equation 
used to estimate fiber number  
is very rough, and there are many 
scenarios in which it can be inaccurate.
To sum up the human evidence, it's 
clear to see there is no distinct answer  
on whether muscle hyperplasia occurs.
Not only are there conflicting results, but the 
individual studies on both sides of the argument  
are highly questionable in quality and validity.
Of course, in large part, 
this is simply because direct  
fiber counting is impossible in human subjects.
When combining and analyzing the 
animal and human evidence together,  
I think there are a couple of different 
viewpoints a person could take.
Perhaps you think that the human evidence is not 
particularly valuable (due to the limitations),  
but given the animal evidence may suggest 
fiber number can increase with weight training,  
you view this as promising evidence that 
fiber number similarly increases in humans.
Or perhaps you think that promising animal 
evidence coupled with a few indirect human  
studies may be sufficient to believe an increase 
in muscle fiber number occurs in humans.
On the other hand, perhaps 
you believe animal studies  
are not particularly useful and combined with 
the mixed and questionable human studies,  
you're skeptical or just uncertain if 
fiber number can increase in humans.
Of course, these are not the 
only viewpoints you can take,  
they are just some that readily came to my mind.
All in all, I think the all of 
viewpoints could be justified.
Moving on, I think a discussion on the 
potential role of anabolic steroids  
in increasing muscle fiber 
numbers could be interesting.
Recall we detailed 4 cross-sectional studies 
finding that a group of bodybuilders or  
powerlifters had a larger whole 
muscle cross-sectional area,  
yet similar individual muscle fiber 
cross-sectional area to untrained  
individuals, potentially indicating 
an increase in muscle fiber number  
explains the larger whole muscle cross-sectional 
area in the bodybuilders or powerlifters.
In 3 of these 4 studies,  
some bodybuilders and powerlifters had 
used or were using anabolic steroids.
Therefore, perhaps this suggests  
users of anabolic steroids may be the most 
susceptible to increasing muscle fiber numbers.
A couple of studies by Eriksson 
et al. further supports this.
In two studies, they found that compared 
to a group of natural powerlifters,  
a group of powerlifters on steroids had a higher 
percentage of muscle fibers from the trapezius and  
vastus lateralis expressing proteins that would 
be present when new muscle fibers are created.
In a third study, they found that in 
the trapezius and vastus lateralis,  
more powerlifters on steroids displayed signs of 
splitting muscle fibers than natural powerlifters.
Having said all of this,  
there is also evidence that anabolic steroids 
may have no impact on muscle fiber numbers.
Recall we also mentioned a study by 
MacDougall et al. who used an equation  
to estimate rough fiber numbers in the biceps 
of bodybuilders and untrained individuals.
All of the bodybuilders in this 
study were on anabolic steroids,  
yet the results found similar fiber numbers 
between them and the untrained individuals,  
suggesting anabolic steroids 
had no effect on fiber numbers.
In summary, it's quite plausible that 
anabolic steroids enhance or make an  
increase in muscle fiber number more 
likely, but unfortunately the human  
evidence isn't sufficient enough 
to verify or falsify this claim.
As we've seen throughout the video, 
the evidence is far from conclusive  
on whether muscle hyperplasia occurs in humans.
But let's assume for a second it does.
What would be the body's reason 
for increasing muscle fiber number?
There are two pretty interesting 
hypotheses I've come across  
that I thought would be 
worth sharing in this video.
The first one suggests an 
increase in muscle fiber number  
may be due to an abnormal regeneration 
response to damaging exercise.
At a fundamental level, this suggests 
that when muscle fibers are damaged as  
a result of hard or novel training, 
the recovery process may abnormally  
result in the splitting of 
pre-existing muscle fibers.
To go into more detail, a paper by Murach et al.  
put forth two potential ways 
in which this could occur.
The first is where a damaged 
muscle fiber is degraded.  
Then, satellite cells (which are 
cells involved in muscle regeneration)  
irregularly fuse to the muscle fiber. The 
satellite cells then differentiate (which means  
to transform) into undeveloped muscle fibers, and 
once they develop, a split muscle fiber appears.
The second is where the muscle fiber experiences 
damage on one side of its outer wall.  
Satellite cells fuse to this particular 
location and differentiate into an  
undeveloped muscle fiber, and once they 
develop, a split muscle fiber appears.
Now, there is some evidence to 
potentially support either of these.
When overviewing the animal 
evidence earlier in this video,  
we noted how stretching and synergistic ablation 
protocols increased muscle fiber number. These  
protocols are quite extreme and likely involve 
significant damage and regeneration responses,  
meaning an abnormal regeneration response 
could explain the increase in fiber numbers.
Moreover, recall we mentioned a study by 
Eriksson et al. finding in trained powerlifters,  
there were signs of splitting from muscle fibers 
obtained from the vastus lateralis and trapezius.
Something we haven't mentioned is the 
researchers found the splitting was coupled  
with evidence of dead muscle fiber segments 
and muscle fibers attempting regeneration.
Hence, an abnormal damage regeneration response  
may explain the splitting muscle 
fibers in the trained powerlifters.
Aside from an abnormal damage regeneration 
response, another potential reason the body might  
increase muscle fiber number relates to individual 
muscle fibers reaching a certain size threshold.
This suggests that an individual muscle 
fiber grows up to a certain size.  
From here, the individual 
muscle fiber splits into two.
Supporting evidence for this comes from a 
fascinating study done by Murach et al. on mice.
They found that after 8 weeks of progressive 
weighted wheel running, the cross-sectional area  
of the soleus muscle fibers had increased, 
with no changes in muscle fiber number.
However, by the 12th week of training, the 
cross-sectional area of the soleus muscle fibers  
had decreased, with a concurrent 
increase in muscle fiber number.
Therefore, this likely suggests that the 
mice's soleus muscle fibers increased in  
cross-sectional area for 8 weeks, but thereafter 
split, producing the increase in fiber number  
and decrease in muscle fiber cross-sectional area.
This brings up an interesting question, why might 
a muscle fiber split upon reaching a certain size?
I think one of the strongest 
answers to this relates to oxygen.
Typically, oxygen diffuses from capillaries  
to mitochondria that are 
located within a muscle fiber.  
Mitochondria can then utilize oxygen to generate 
energy that can power muscle force production.
However, as muscle fibers continuously enlarge, 
and given mitochondria concentrations do not  
appear to increase with resistance training, 
and may even decrease, there could come a point  
where it's too difficult for oxygen 
to diffuse out from capillaries  
to certain mitochondria within the fiber, due 
to an excessively large diffusion distance.
As a result, the muscle fiber splits 
into two, thereby resulting in two  
smaller muscle fibers that should have 
no issue with oxygen diffusion distances.
Indeed, there is evidence from rats 
and crabs that fibers may split  
when diffusing oxygen across a 
muscle fiber becomes difficult.
To conclude, despite there being 
some interesting hypotheses  
behind why the body may 
increase muscle fiber number,  
the current research on whether muscle hyperplasia 
occurs in humans from training is far from clear.
When overviewing the current animal and 
human research, some may believe it is  
promising in suggesting fiber numbers may 
increase, whereas others may think otherwise.
Ultimately, due to the major limitation 
in studying whether muscle fiber number  
can increase in humans, I'm not sure we're 
going to get a conclusive answer anytime soon.
Perhaps if non-invasive technologies can 
be developed to accurately count muscle  
fiber numbers in the future, we'll 
be able to make firmer conclusions.