In a session, most people perform 
multiple sets on a given exercise,  
interspersed by a rest interval, typically 
lasting anywhere from 1 to 5 minutes.  
Most people also tend to hold their rest interval 
durations fairly constant from workout to workout.
Opposed to this, from workout to workout,  
an individual could gradually decrease 
their rest interval durations between sets.
How does this compare to using a constant 
rest interval duration every session for  
hypertrophy and strength? Is it 
better, worse, or no different?
Let us explore 2 studies by Souza 
Junior et al. addressing this.  
Then, we'll examine the limitations and 
our conclusions with the current data.
The first study recruited 21 men 
with at least 1 year of training  
experience and assigned them into a 
constant or decreasing rest group.
For the first 2 weeks, both 
groups trained identically.  
They trained 6 times each week (the program 
is on-screen) with each exercise performed  
for 3 sets with a 10-12 rep max load, 
using 2 minutes of rest between sets.
Thereafter, for the remaining 6 weeks,  
both groups continued to train 6 times 
per week but using a different program  
(shown on-screen), with each exercise 
performed for 4 sets with an 8-10 rep-max load.
The constant rest group continued resting 
2 minutes between their sets in a session,  
whereas the decreasing rest 
group, throughout the 6 weeks,  
gradually decreased their rest interval 
duration from 2 minutes to 30 seconds.
I should note that both groups adjusted 
their loads when necessary to ensure they  
kept performing 8-10 repetitions 
across their sets every session.
After the 8 weeks of training, there was 
no statistically significant difference in  
increases in squat and bench press 
one-rep max between the two groups.
Nor was there any statistically 
significant difference in thigh  
and arm cross-sectional area 
gains between the two groups.
Therefore, these results indicate gradually 
decreasing your rest interval duration across  
6 weeks (from 2 minutes to 30 seconds) does 
not compromise hypertrophy or strength versus  
resting for 2 minutes between sets, 
but it was not any better either.
I want to bring your attention to another 
way we could think of these results.
On-screen are the volume loads (defined 
as the number of sets multiped by load)  
achieved on the bench press and squat 
exercise across the final 6 weeks of training.
The constant rest group continuously 
increased volume load on both these  
exercises over the 6 weeks. Now, given both 
groups performed 4 sets on each exercise,  
this data simply indicates this constant rest 
group managed to progressive overload via  
increasing the load they used within 
the 8-10 reps over the 6 weeks.
Conversely, the decreasing rest group saw minimal 
changes in volume load on both exercises over the  
6 weeks. Again, given they performed 4 sets per 
exercise, this simply means they largely did not  
increase the load used on their sets as they 
decreased their rest intervals over the 6 weeks.
Another way to say all of this 
is that the constant rest group  
progressively overloaded via increasing 
the load they used, while the decreasing  
rest group progressively overloaded by 
decreasing their rest interval durations.
As both groups did not experience 
different strength or hypertrophy gains,  
this study possibly indicates progressively 
overloading via decreasing your rest interval  
durations is no less effective than progressively 
overloading via increasing the load you use.
Let us move on to the second, 
similarly designed, study.
22 men with at least 1 year 
of training experience were  
assigned into a constant or decreasing rest group.
Both groups trained 6 times per week 
(the program is on-screen) for 8 weeks,  
with each exercise performed for 
4 sets with an 8-10 rep-max load.
The constant rest group used 2 minutes of 
rest between sets throughout the full 8 weeks.
The decreasing rest group rested for 2 
minutes between sets for the first 2 weeks,  
and thereafter gradually decreased 
their rest interval duration each  
week until they rested 30 seconds between sets.
Like the last study, both groups adjusted 
their loads when necessary to ensure they  
kept performing 8-10 repetitions 
across their sets every session.
Unlike the last study, the researchers 
had both groups supplement creatine.  
All subjects in both groups loaded up 
during the first 7 days (consuming 20g of  
creatine ) and thereafter maintained a dosage 
of 5g of creatine until the end of the study.
After the 8 training weeks, there was no 
statistically significant difference in  
increases in squat and bench press 
one-rep max between the two groups.
Nor was there any statistically 
significant difference in thigh  
and arm cross-sectional area 
gains between the two groups.  
Having said this, the percentages do actually 
appear to favor the decreasing rest group.
However, given it was not 
statistically significant,  
we cannot be sure this percentage difference 
between groups truly reflects a difference.  
There were only 11 subjects per group, small 
sample sizes like this can compromise your ability  
to detect statistically significant changes, but 
they also introduce large variation in each group,  
such that these differences might 
just be a result of random chance.
On the account of this, I think the most 
accurate conclusion from this data is that  
gradually decreasing your rest interval duration 
(from 2 minutes to 30 seconds) across 8 weeks  
was no less effective than constantly resting 2 
minutes between sets for strength and hypertrophy.
Now, in this study, volume load was defined 
as load multiplied by repetition number.  
However, given both groups 
performed 8-10 repetitions,  
any change in volume load should 
largely reflect changes in loads.
The constant rest group increased their  
volume load on the bench press and 
squat across the 8 training weeks,  
implying they progressively overloaded via 
increasing the loads used on their sets.
However, interestingly, the decreasing 
rest group actually saw a sharp decrease  
in bench press volume load during weeks 3 and 
4, indicating a reduction in load was needed to  
maintain 8-10 reps per set as they gradually 
decreased their rest interval durations.  
Thereafter, they more stably maintained volume 
load, indicating they probably maintained  
similar set loads while continuing 
to decrease rest interval durations.
Volume load on the squat for the decreasing 
rest group was fairly stable across the 8 weeks,  
with slight reductions in the 
final weeks, largely indicating  
they maintained their set loads while 
decreasing their rest interval durations.
As a result, this study (like the last one)  
indicates progressively overloading via 
decreasing your rest interval durations  
(even if this somewhat necessitates a load 
reduction in some circumstances) is no less  
effective than progressively overloading via 
increasing set loads for hypertrophy and strength.
Integrating these two studies, it 
seems decreasing your rest interval  
durations is not inferior to using 
a constant rest interval duration.
Although, limitations and considerations exist.
The decreasing rest group was 
compared to a constant rest  
group resting 2 minutes between sets. 
However, is 2 minutes of rest between  
sets even optimal for hypertrophy and 
strength gains in the first place?
As thoroughly examined in our rest interval 
ultimate guide video, with compound exercises,  
resting for 2 minutes or more seems better 
for hypertrophy than shorter durations.  
With isolation exercises, the current data is 
conflicting in the optimal rest interval duration.
For strength, the current data indicates 2 minutes 
or more may be superior to shorter durations,  
at least for trained individuals.
However, is there actually 
a difference between resting  
for exactly 2 minutes or resting beyond this?
Ahtianen et al. found resting 2 minutes 
between sets produced similar quadriceps  
cross-sectional area increases compared 
to resting 5 minutes between sets.  
However, it's worth noting subjects 
performed 1 extra set per exercise on  
average when resting 2 minutes between 
sets, potentially confounding things.
Willardson et al. found with all other training 
variables equal, resting 2 minutes between sets  
produced similar squat one-rep max gains 
compared to resting 4 minutes between sets.
Resultantly, the current limited existing 
evidence suggests the use of 2-minute rest  
intervals by the constant rep group in the 
studies might not actually be a limitation.  
But again, this is limited evidence, no other 
existing data (to my knowledge) helps us.
Another consideration is both studies lasted 8 
weeks, what would happen over longer durations?
At least two possible questions stem from this.
First, what if after the 8 weeks, the decreasing 
rest group simply continued to rest 30 seconds  
between sets (as this itself is quite a short rest 
duration, shortening it further may not be that  
practical), over many months, would they still 
experience similar strength and hypertrophy gains?
Secondly, what if someone, over many months, kept 
switching back and forth between periods of only  
progressively overloading via decreasing rest 
interval durations and periods of maintaining  
a constant rest interval but overloading 
via increasing set loads? would this method  
still be as effective as exclusively using a 
constant rest interval duration between sets?
Finally, it's worth remembering both the studies  
were conducted on trained men with 
an average age of roughly 20-22.
What about other individuals 
not in this demographic?
Overall, it would be awesome to see if 
future studies could replicate these studies,  
as well as perhaps address some of the 
limitations and considerations we noted.  
But for the time being, it seems that 
decreasing rest interval durations,  
at least in the short term, may be perfectly 
fine for hypertrophy and strength gains.