Hey, what's up?
This is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want to do a quick review on
HMB, which is one of the more popular bodybuilding
supplements available these days.
HMB is a metabolite of the amino acid L-Leucine.
And L-Leucine is of course one of the three
branched-chain amino acids, which do play
a very important role in both muscle growth
and muscle sparing.
And out of the three branched-chain amino
acids, L-Valine and L-Isoleucine are the other
two; L-Leucine plays the most important role.
And because L-Leucine is the more -- most
powerful amino acid involved in muscle growth,
scientists then theorized that there might
be a smaller metabolite of Leucine that was
responsible for all of its positive effects.
And if they could isolate them at that metabolite,
then it could be taken in supplemental form
to increase muscle growth while only requiring
a very small dosage.
And this is where HMB came into the picture.
Now, HMB supplements were first made available
back in 1996, and were promoted as the next
big thing in the world of bodybuilding supplementation.
And even to this day, HMB supplements are
some of the more heavily marketed products
that you'll find.
HMB is claimed to be a powerful anti-catabolic
supplement and an effective muscle builder
as well.
So, it's said to decrease the rate of muscle
breakdown in the body as well as play an important
role in stimulating protein synthesis.
Now, some studies conducted on animals have
shown very positive results.
When animals are given high amounts of HMB
under stressful condition -- conditions, they
seem to retain more muscle mass, and they
also have lower death rates than the animals
that aren't fed the HMB.
However, it's very important to understand
a human metabolism does not function in the
same way that it does in other animals.
And studies on humans using HMB have been
conflicting at best.
Early HMB supplement research on humans did
show positive results with a daily dosage
of about 3grams.
But many of these studies were poorly controlled
and they were performed on untrained individuals.
And most importantly, the majority of that
initial research that did show beneficial
effects was carried out by the very person
who holds the patent on HMB.
So, this doesn't automatically make the studies
invalid.
But it certainly raises a pretty big red flag,
especially when you look at the hugely positive
conclusions of that research.
Now, not surprisingly, a lot of the further
studies on HMB have shown no positive effects
on lean body mass or on strength performance.
And several of these studies even used double
the amount than most HMB supplements recommend.
The real world experience seems to pretty
much echo the same thing.
Most HMB users report no positive increases
in muscle mass, strength or recovery.
So, given the lack of conclusive research
and the first-hand experience of most HMB
users, I can't really think of any good reason
to go out and spend your money on an HMB supplement
at this point.
It may have useful applications for people
that have specific muscle-wasting conditions.
But for hard-training bodybuilders and athletes,
the stuff just pretty much doesn't seem to
work.
Even if HMB does eventually prove to be effective
as a muscle building supplement, it will likely
only be for very specific applications such
as reducing post-workout muscle soreness or
improving recovery in complete beginners.
But again, even for those applications the
research isn't clear.
It's possible that future studies might prove
otherwise.
But at the moment, I would simply recommend
sticking with proven supplements with solid
track records such as whey protein, creatine,
beta-alanine, multivitamins, fish oil, et
cetera.
If you got cash left over after that, go buy
some steak and oatmeal, and don't bother with
HMB.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you do want to check out an honest research
back line of bodybuilding supplements that
actually do produce results, make sure to
check out our products over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description bar.
Also make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night.
And also make sure to subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all future video lessons.
So, I hope you found this video useful.
And I'll talk to you again soon.