The truth is that there are some people out
there who are just naturally blessed with
more muscular legs and they don't have to
train them as hard in comparison to the average
person.
There are guys out there with impressive quads
and hamstrings who don't even consistently
train with weights at all.
Then on the other end of the spectrum are
those with naturally thin legs where adding
significant size is going to be more challenging.
So there's for sure a genetic component involved.
However, if you're seeing consistent gains
in your other muscle groups, but your legs
are the ones that are lagging behind, the
real reason for this is usually pretty straightforward.
The reason, assuming you already train with
sufficient volume and you're using proper
form with a full range of motion on your lifts,
the reason is that compound leg exercises
are much more demanding on your body as a
whole because the quads, hamstrings, and glutes
are very large muscle groups and they're capable
of moving a lot more weight in comparison
to other muscle groups.
And so most lifters without even realizing
it, they don't end up training their legs
within the same proximity to muscular failure
as they do with their upper body muscles,
which are generally just a lot easier to train.
So maybe you're averaging say one to two reps
short of failure on most of your upper body
lifts, but then when it comes to leg training,
you're actually leaving four or five or even
more reps in the tank on your sets, but you're
perceiving it as being closer to muscular
failure because your body as a whole is under
a lot more stress during the set just from
having to move that larger amount of weight
using your body's largest muscle groups.
And so the total perceived stress, say four
rep short of failure if you're doing a barbell
squat, that feels like the same level of difficulty
as going maybe two reps short of failure on
a weighted pull up, or going all the way to
failure on an isolation exercise like maybe
a bicep curl or a lateral raise.
So what often ends up happening is that you
end up cutting the set off at that point,
even though your actual leg muscles, the muscles
that you're trying to target for hypertrophy,
they still have enough strength to continue
further but that total body stress is what
stops you from continuing, so in very simple
terms, you're just training your legs as hard
as you're training everything else, even though
it might seem like you are.
I'll even call myself out on this.
Back in my bodybuilding focused days where
my goal was to be as big and as strong as
I possibly could, I used to train my legs
really hard.
I'd go into the gym on leg day.
I was nervous, super focused.
I'd psych myself up, get into the squat rack
and how difficult it felt was irrelevant to
me.
Every rep was just a maximum effort and I
knew how close I was to failure and what the
goal of the set was, and it was just a matter
of getting the reps done, no matter how challenging
it felt.
Back then I had pretty well developed legs.
They didn't lag behind my upper body, and
it was because I treated my leg training in
exactly the same way as I treated any other
muscle group, which is something that a lot
of people just don't do.
It wasn't about perceived total body discomfort
like, "Damn, this bar on my back feels so
heavy.
My shoulders are burning.
I'm breathing heavily.
My back feels fatigued, so I guess I should
just stop now."
It was just about how close my actual leg
muscles were to muscular failure, and the
set continued until I hit the level of effort
that I was aiming for regardless of anything
else, whether it was two reps short of failure,
one rep short of failure, or all the way to
complete muscular failure.
Push it.
But since bodybuilding hasn't really been
my goal for probably the past eight years
or so, and I don't take it quite as seriously
anymore because I've been doing it for such
a long time and also because my desired physique
is more of a middle ground look anyway, because
of that I just stopped training my legs as
hard as I used to.
You know, I started getting a lot more casual
with my leg workouts, still going within a
few reps of failure, still training hard,
but not truly buckling down and really hitting
them with the same level of effort like I
used to, but still training my upper body
fairly hard again because it's generally just
an easier set of muscles to hit and it doesn't
require as much mental toughness.
As a result of that, my legs did lose a noticeable
amount of size and they do lag somewhat behind
my upper body now.
Not horribly, but the difference is pretty
obvious if I just look at my physique and
if I look objectively at my training, the
reason is pretty obvious for that as well.
That's something that I'm working on correcting
right now because I just had to look at what
I was doing and admit like, "Hey man, you
know, you're just not training as hard as
you could be in this particular area."
Now, of course everyone has different goals
and different preferences and they treat their
training with different levels of seriousness,
so I'm not saying it's a given that you should
want to build the biggest legs possible or
that there's some sort of ideal physique proportion
that you must aim for.
But what I am saying is that if your goal
is to build bigger legs and they aren't really
responding that well even though your other
muscle groups are, then I would wager that
the primary reason for that is that probably
without realizing it, you're just leaving
more reps in the tank on your lower body exercises
than you are on your upper body lifts because
leg exercises are generally a lot more difficult
and what you're doing is cutting the set off
based on general total body discomfort as
opposed to where your quads and hamstrings
actually are in relation to true muscular
failure.
I would say that if your goal is to maximize
hypertrophy, then on the bulk of your sets
you should be aiming for about one to two
reps short of failure, and I would say three
reps at the most.
Meaning that if you were lifting with let's
say your ten-rep max, you'd want to be doing
anywhere from seven to nine reps or if you're
lifting with your eight-rep max, you'd want
to be doing anywhere from five to seven reps.
So next time you're in the squat rack and
you've got that loaded bar on your back and
you're uncomfortable and your mind is telling
you to stop, or you're on the leg press and
you're moving that heavy load that most people
usually are capable of moving on the leg press,
or even something a during something like
a Romanian deadlift.
Try to be honest with yourself and ask if
there was a gun to my head right now, how
many more reps could I truly squeeze out in
proper form if I exerted myself with maximum
effort, regardless of how uncomfortable I
feel in this moment or how difficult it is?
If the answer is any more than about one to
two reps, again, three at the most, then you're
just not training your legs hard enough and
you need to mentally buckle down and start
pushing yourself closer to the point of muscular
failure if you really want to develop your
legs optimally.
If you found this video helpful and you want
to get access to my recommended weekly training
routines so that you can apply this advice
with maximum effectiveness, including the
weekly split, exercise layout, volume rep
ranges, and more, then make sure to take my
physique quiz over at Quiz.SeanNal.com, because
that will hook you up with the proper step-by-step
workout plan as well as the proper nutrition
plan for you based on your individual goals,
body type, and experience level.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box below.
You can also follow me over on Instagram for
more daily tips and updates @SEAN_NALEWANYJ,
and as always, make sure to hit the like button,
leave a comment, and subscribe below if you
haven't already in order to stay up to date
on future videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.