In this video, we'll be overviewing a 
fascinating study by Martinez-Cava et al.  
exploring how a full range of motion bench 
press compares to a partial range of motion  
bench press training only some part of the 
top range of motion for building strength.
Then, we'll make some speculations on 
how hypertrophy may compare between  
full and partial range of 
motion bench press training.  
We'll also discuss very interesting potential 
implications of the results from the study.
Martinez Cava et al. recruited 49 men with 6 
months of training experience and allocated  
them into a full range of motion, 2/3 range of 
motion, 1/3 range of motion, or control group.
We won’t discuss the control group from hereafter.  
They did not train and expectedly 
made virtually no gains.
All groups trained the smith machine barbell bench 
press twice per week for a total of 10 weeks.
Repetitions for the full range of motion 
group were as follows: they lowered the  
barbell from full elbow lockout all the way 
down to the chest, where they momentarily let  
the bar rest for 2 seconds thanks to the smith 
machine spotters, before reversing the motion.
The 2/3 range of motion group lowered the 
barbell from full elbow lockout to only  
2/3rd of the way down to the chest, where 
they momentarily let the barbell rest for  
2 seconds thanks to the smith machine 
spotters, before reversing the motion.
The 1/3 range of motion group lowered the 
barbell from full elbow lockout to only  
1/3rd of the way down to the chest, where 
they momentarily let the barbell rest for  
2 seconds thanks to the smith machine 
spotters, before reversing the motion.
All subjects performed their repetitions 
with a maximal intended lifting speed  
and a controlled lowering speed.
This was a velocity-based study,  
meaning the velocity of each lifting 
phase was recorded via special equipment.
For each individual, as there’s a 
relationship between the lifting  
velocity during the 1st repetition on a 
set and the relative load you’re using,  
the subjects were able to autoregulate 
and train with the loads they intended to.
The exact reps, sets, and loads used 
throughout the 10 weeks are shown on screen.
Of course, the relative loads used for 
each group are specific to the range of  
motion they trained with. For example, 
when subjects trained with a 70% one-rep  
max load, the full range of motion group used 70%  
of their full range of motion one-rep max, 
the 1/3rd range of motion group used 70%  
of their 1/3rd one-rep max, and the 2/3rd range of 
motion group used 70% of their 2/3rd one-rep max.
Before and after the study, a range of 
strength and power measurements were assessed.
Most relevant for our purposes, all 3 groups had 
their one-rep maxes on the full range of motion  
bench press, 1/3 range of motion bench press, 
and 2/3 range of motion bench press tested.
The researchers expressed one-rep max gains 
relative to the participant’s body weight.
What they found was the full range of 
motion group saw the greatest gains in  
one-rep max to bodyweight ratios for all 
three bench press variations. Also, the 2/3  
range of motion group saw greater one-rep max to 
bodyweight ratio gains compared to the 1/3 group.
Stated another way, training with 
the full range of motion bench press  
(which is what the full range of motion 
group did) was the most effective for  
increasing full range of motion bench 
press, 2/3 range of motion bench press,  
and 1/3 range of motion bench press 
one-rep max to bodyweight ratios.
Also, training with a 1/3 
range of motion bench press  
(which is was the 1/3 range of motion 
group did) was the least effective for  
increasing one-rep max to bodyweight ratios 
on all three of the bench press variations.
These findings are highly interesting. Not 
only do they indicate a full range of motion  
bench press is superior for increasing 
full range of motion bench press strength,  
but a full range of motion bench press is 
also better for increasing partial range of  
motion bench press strength versus training with 
that specific partial range of motion itself.
It's not entirely clear what 
could explain these findings.
However, could hypertrophy be involved?
Although there's no direct research comparing a 
full and partial range of motion bench press for  
hypertrophy, indirect data might indicate a full 
range of motion bench press would be superior.
Let me explain.
Compared to a partial range of motion 
bench press training only the top portion  
(such as a 1/3rd or 2/3rd range of motion), a 
full range of motion bench press would achieve  
a much greater stretch under load of 
the chest, shoulders, and triceps.
This matters as stretch under load seems 
to be powerful for stimulating hypertrophy.
A range of studies using exercises other than 
the bench press has found that using a range  
of motion that accomplishes a stretch under 
load of the working muscles produces more  
hypertrophy than a range of motion that 
minimally stretches the working muscles.
So, how does this all relate to full range 
of motion bench press training producing the  
greatest strength gains across the three 
different bench press ranges of motions?
One way muscles hypertrophy is 
via something called myofibrils  
(which are found within muscle fibers) growing.
Myofibrils contain contractile units (that 
is, the force-generating units of a muscle).  
One main way a myofibril grows is via increasing 
the number of force-generating units it has.  
This would be very beneficial 
for increasing strength.
As a result, perhaps full range of motion 
bench press training produced more hypertrophy  
(and thus myofibril growth) versus training 
with the 1/3rd or 2/3rd range of motions,  
explaining why full range of motion 
bench press training was the most  
effective for increasing strength 
across all three ranges of motions.
Of course, this is purely speculation.
I think it's almost certain a full range of 
motion bench press produces more hypertrophy  
than a partial range of motion bench press that 
trains only some top portion. But whether this  
hypertrophy would truly explain the greater 
strength gains is difficult to verify, as other  
factors such as neural adaptations and movement 
efficiency would be in play with strength.
Moving on, Martinez-Cava et al. 
mentioned something quite interesting.
Powerlifters, of course, aim to maximize 
their one-rep max on the barbell bench press.
However, it's arguable that many powerlifters, 
due to significantly arching their spine and/or  
retracting their scapula, perform a 
partial range of motion bench press.
As this study found training a full 
range of motion bench press was  
more effective for increasing partial 
range of motion bench press strength  
than training that partial range 
of motion bench press itself,  
perhaps powerlifters might benefit from training 
with a fuller range of motion (via less arching  
and/or scapular retraction) to ultimately 
enhance their competition way of bench pressing.
Furthermore, maybe cambered bar bench pressing, 
due to increasing the range of motion even  
further, could be beneficial for those looking 
to maximize their normal bench press one-rep max.
Before ending this video,  
let us discuss some notable limitations and 
considerations of the Martinez-Cava et al. study.
Firstly, as many of you were probably 
thinking, a smith machine was used.
There are way more similarities between the smith 
machine and barbell bench press than differences.  
But, differences such as stabilization 
requirements and bar path still exist. It's not  
clear if these differences would change anything 
if the Martinez-Cava et al. study used a barbell.
Secondly, there actually is some data that  
somewhat oppose the findings 
of the Martinez-Cava study.
Two studies by Massey et al. 
had subjects either train: 
A full range of motion bench press (we'll 
call the full range of motion group) 
A partial range of motion bench press (training 
only the first 2-5 inches of the motion) (we'll  
call the partial range of motion group)
Or an even split of both full and partial  
range of motion bench pressing 
(we'll call the combination group).
Before and after the study, the 
researchers only measured one-rep  
max on the full range of motion 
bench press for all three groups.
In one of the studies, conducted on women with 
limited training experience, the full range of  
motion group experienced the greatest increases 
in full range of motion bench press one-rep max  
versus the two other groups. These findings do 
not conflict with the Martinez-Cava et al. study.
However, in the other study conducted 
on men with some training experience,  
all three groups experienced increases in 
full range of motion bench press one-rep  
max that was not statistically 
different between one another.
Put another way, training a partial range 
of motion bench press, or a combination of  
full and partial range of motion bench pressing, 
was measurably no less effective than training a  
full range of motion bench press for increasing 
full range of motion bench press one-rep max.
It's not readily clear what 
explains these conflicting data.  
More research is evidently still 
going to be valuable and insightful.
Lastly, remember that all of the bench 
press studies we've overviewed used a  
partial range of motion that trained the top part.
But, could there be any benefit to a partial 
range of motion that trains the bottom part?
We overviewed earlier that one reason as to why I 
think the full range of motion bench press would  
produce more hypertrophy than a partial one 
that trains the top part is as a full range  
of motion achieves a greater stretch under 
load of the chest, shoulders, and triceps.
But, a partial range of motion that trains the  
bottom part would accomplish a stretch 
under load of the working muscles too.  
Therefore, perhaps this would be 
perfectly fine for muscle hypertrophy.
In fact, could it be superior?
I question this as a study by Pedrosa et al. 
(which we’ve overviewed in a previous video)  
actually found a partial range of motion leg 
extension at the bottom part (where the quadriceps  
are stretched) produced overall more quadriceps 
growth than full range of motion leg extensions.
Of course, this study used a leg extension.  
Thus, we cannot be certain these findings 
can be replicated with the bench press.
Ultimately, it would be awesome to 
see if future research can explore  
the effectiveness of a partial range of motion 
that trains the bottom part for hypertrophy,  
as well as if this type of partial range of 
motion could have any benefit for powerlifters  
or those looking to generally maximize their 
full range of motion bench press strength.