What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and in this
video today I’m going to be giving you ten
tips that you can apply if you’ve hit a
bench press plateau and your strength numbers
aren’t going up.
I’d say out of all the different exercises
that lifters tend to stuck on the bench press
is definitely one of the most common, and
so here’s what I would suggest doing about
it.
Tip number one, first and foremost, is to
really ask yourself whether or not you’ve
truly hit a legit bench press plateau to begin
with.
Building muscle is a slow and gradual process
and so is building a big bench press, or just
getting strong on any lift in general.
A lot of guys will come to me and say that
their bench press is stuck but then when they
show me their actual strength numbers it turns
out that they’re progressing at a perfectly
reasonable pace and they’re just expecting
too much too soon.
I mean, if all you did was add five pounds
to the bar in total for every three weeks
of consistent benching, which is less than
one pound on either side of the bar per week
on average, if you did that over the course
of a year you’ve end up with eighty-five
more pounds on the bar.
So for the year as a whole the number ends
up being pretty significant but from week
to week the improvements are so small that
it might not even feel like they count.
So you have to focus on baby steps here and
keep in mind that even doing one extra rep
with the same weight is still significant
progress and it doesn’t mean that you’ve
hit a plateau.
So start writing your workouts in detail and
make it your goal to beat the logbook every
week by just making small micro progressions.
And as long as the numbers are consistently
going up overtime you’re probably on the
right track and you might not need to make
any adjustments at all.
Now, assuming you truly have hit a bench press
plateau and the numbers have been totally
stuck for several weeks or more tip number
two, a very simple one, and that is to prioritize
the bench press in your workout.
The research shows that whatever movement
you train first in your workout tends to improve
the fastest in terms of strength and muscle
growth because you’ll be hitting that exercise
when your muscles and your nervous systems
are fully primed and at their peak strength.
So if your other lifts are improving but your
bench press isn’t make sure to perform the
bench press as the very first movement in
your workout.
Tip number thee is to really hone in on your
bench press technique.
It might look like a really simple exercise
on the surface but it’s actually a really
complex movement with a lot of smaller details
that have to be taken into account if you
want to put up the biggest number possible.
Now, this video here is not meant to be a
bench press tutorial.
The entire books have written on the subject
and there are quite a few tutorials that you
can find online if you look.
But the main point that I want to make here
is to just keep in mind that bench pressing
is a skill.
It’s a skill that has to be learned and
that you can improve on.
And in a lot of cases, fixing your bench press
plateau is a matter of fixing your bench press
technique.
So just some of the main simple things, I’m
not going to demonstrate them here because
they’re pretty straight forward, but you
want to make sure that your scapula is retracted
throughout the exercise and then you had your
elbows slightly tucked because that’s going
to let you drive your shoulders back into
the bench.
Make sure to keep a solid base with your legs
and drive your heels into the ground.
Make sure to keep your wrist neutral, like
I talked about weeks ago, don’t let them
bend backward like a lot of people do, that’s
going to decrease your strength and put more
strain in your wrist joint.
And also make sure to find the right grip
width because that’s also going to maximize
strength output.
There’s no perfect grip width that going
to apply to everybody, but the bottom line
is to find the grip width that causes your
forearms to be perpendicular to the floor
with your hands and elbows directly stacked
on top of each other.
Those are just some of the main form cues.
I’ll try to put out a complete tutorial
at some point, but again, bench pressing is
a skill and the skilled you become the stronger
you’re going to become also.
Tip number four is to just bench press more
often.
That can become a point of doing too much
if you aren’t careful but in general if
you want to increase your strength on a given
movement, the simplest thing you can do is
to increase the frequency and/or the volume
per session for that specific movement.
And this helps not only in terms of increasing
your raw physical strength but also just in
terms of becoming a more skilled bench presser
from a technical standpoint.
So if right now you’re only benching once
per week try increasing that to twice per
week.
If you’re already benching twice a week
then try increasing that to three times a
week and see if it helps.
Start by upping the frequency and if you’re
able to easily handle that then you can also
increase the volume as well.
So if right you’re doing three sets of bench
press per workout you can increase that to
four or five sets.
And ideally if you are going to doing a higher
volume benching phase then you’ll want to
decrease the volume a bit on your other exercises
to compensate to make sure that you’re fully
recovering.
Tip number five is to include some accessory
movement.
So, remember that the bench press is a compound
exercise and even though the pecs are the
targeted muscle your shoulders and triceps
are also heavily involved as well.
And so all of these muscle groups need to
be fully strengthen in order to continually
add more weight to your bench.
So it’s possible that you might have a weak
link in there somewhere and a very general
way of checking is to see where your sticking
point is.
So it it’s in the bottom position then it’s
either going to be your chest or your shoulders
or both, that’s usually where most people
have their issue, and if it’s more toward
the top half then it’s going to be more
triceps.
So there a lot of different movements that
can help out here.
For strengthening the bottom position, a basic
dumbbell press is a good option because it
gives you a slightly larger range of motion.
You can do a pause bench press where you just
do normal bench press but you hold the weight
for two to three seconds in the bottom position
before pressing it back up.
And an overhead press would also be useful
using either a barbell or dumbbells and that’s
going to help you build more shoulder strength
which is going to carry over to your bench
press.
And then for triceps, a close-grip bench press
would be helpful.
If you’re more advanced you could also do
board work with two or three boards lying
on your chest.
That’s going to help you strengthen your
lockout.
Or you can also get the same effect by bench
pressing inside of a power rack and setting
the pins up higher.
And from there, just any basic tricep extension
that’s also going to assist you as well.
These are just a few examples because there
are a lot different possible accessory movements
that you can perform but these will give you
a good starting point.
Tip number six is to increase your calories.
You can build the strength effectively eating
at maintenance or even in a deficit if you’re
more of beginner but this will usually only
happen up to a point before you just need
to gain more overall mass to keep the strength
number going.
And this is especially true with a bench press
plateau because benching is one exercise where
just being heavier in general really helps
you get more leverage and more control over
the weight.
And that’s why fro a lot of lifters when
they do a cutting phase and they start dropping
overall bodyweight the bench press is usually
one of the first lifts where the strength
loses are the most noticeable.
So if your bodyweight has been totally stagnant
then that means that your currently eating
at your calorie maintenance level, in which
case you can add an extra one hundred to two
hundred calories on top or four current intake
in order to keep things moving.
Tip number seven is to perform a weight acclamation
warm-up, which is going to help to prime your
nervous system before those heavy working
sets.
And the basic idea here is start off with
a very light weight for higher reps and then
gradually increase the weight while lowering
the reps and working up to the maximum weight
that you’ll be using for the first main
set of your workout.
Now, the numbers here don’t need to be exact
but this is a basic template that you can
follow.
And the percentage given is the percentage
of the weight that you’ll be using on your
first heavy set of the workout.
And I’ll out this in the description below
as well.
So, three more basic tips, tip number eight
is to decrease your rep range.
If you’ve been benching mainly using moderate
to higher reps, let say eight reps or more,
try dropping that down to around the four
to six rep range.
Heavier weights for lower reps are going to
be more effective for building raw strength
and that might be what you need in order to
spark some further strength gains.
Just make sure to increase the weight cautiously
and make sure that your form and your technique
are still fully on point even with the heavier
load.
Tip number nine is to rest longer in between
sets.
I talked about this in previous videos but
if your goal is to gain muscle and gain strength
at your full capacity then it’s really important
that you’re not just jumping right into
your next set before you’ve had the chance
to fully recover from the previous one.
And this is especially true in the case of
a bench press plateau where conserving every
bit of strength possible is going to be really
important in helping you to add more weight
to the bar.
So, short rest times of one to two minutes
are probably fine for those lighter and easier
isolation exercises but if your bench press
has hit a sticking point try bumping that
up to rest period of at least three to four
minutes between each set.
And tip number ten is to use micro plates.
So let say you’ve been stuck at two hundred
pounds for five reps for a few weeks, you
can’t get that sixth rep but going up to
two or five feels to heavy for you and in
that case one option is to microload by adding
one and a quarter pound plates to each side
or even less than that rather than the regular
two and a half pound plates.
There’s nothing mandatory about using exact
five pound increases on the bench press and
sometimes adding a bit less than that can
help you land in the sweet spot that you need
in order to keep things moving forward.
So you can just buy some basic micro plates
off Amazon or buy locally and just keep them
your gym bag for when you need them.
So that’s it.
ten tips to break through bench press plateau
and if you go through and apply all these
tips properly then you shouldn’t have any
issues getting those strength numbers moving
again.
So I hope this was helpful.
If you want to get all the tools you need
in terms of training, nutrition and supplementation
to maximize your size and strength gains as
efficiently as possible for all exercises
and all muscle groups without the hype and
BS then you can grab my complete step-by-step
Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
the little icon at the top of the screen here
or by heading over to www.BTBluePrint.com,
the link is in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video make sure to hit
the like button, leave a comment and subscribe.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
and make sure to follow me on facebook and
Instagram as well.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.