Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here,
with a brand new series entitled, "Muscle
in minutes" where I provide quick to the point
answers to your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less.
Now, today's question comes from Andrew, who
says that he's been training for three months
now and hasn't gained any body weight.
Here's the bottom line, if you haven't gained
any body weight yet, all it means is that
your calorie intake is insufficient.
In order to build muscle, you have to consume
more calories than you burn each day.
This is known as the "Law of energy balance"
and is an absolute fundamental prerequisite
for gaining new muscle.
Now, the simplest way you can calculate this
is to take your body weight and multiply it
by 17 to 20.
And that will give you a rough range of calories
that you should chew for each day in order
to support new muscle growth.
If you do want to be a little bit more accurate,
you can use what's called the "Harris Benedict
Formula", which takes into account a few individual
factors such as your height, your age, your
activity level, et cetera, in order to give
you a slightly more accurate reading.
Sometimes, the difference between maintaining
your current weight and gaining new muscle
every week is a simple matter of a few hundred
calories, which could be something as basic
as a scope whey and milk with a banana.
So, don't be lazy.
Figure out your rough calorie needs for the
day.
And do as much as you can to hit that range
on a consistent basis.
Otherwise, all of the effort you're putting
in at the gym could be a complete waste of
time.
So, that's your question answered.
If you did enjoy this video and found the
information useful, please make sure to hit
the like button and subscribe.
If you have a question that you would like
answered, just visit us over on Facebook.
The link is in the description bar.
That's the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook page.
Just hit the like button, post your question
on that page.
And I'll either answer the question on the
Facebook page or I'll post a video response
just like this one.
So, thanks for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.