Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to discuss behind the neck presses
and whether or not they are a safe and effective
lift to include in your routine.
So basic overhead freeweight presses have
always been considered as the underlying foundation
of effective shoulder training.
Along with the the military press and the
seated overhead dumbbell press, behind-the-neck
presses are another popular variation that
you’ll often see being performed at the
gym.
Now although these have been a staple lift
in bodybuilding routines for decades, their
safety is often brought up as an issue of
concern.
It’s claimed that they place the shoulder
into a vulnerable position and put the lifter
at risk for injury.
But what is the real truth here?
Are behind-the-neck presses safe?
Or should you scrap them from your program
altogether?
Well when you consider the basic bio-mechanics
of the movement, it is fairly clear to see
that the critics of this lift are, in fact,
correct.
You’ll almost certainly be best off ditching
those behind-the-neck presses and replacing
them with a pressing movement from the front.
And here’s why.
In order to move your upper arms into the
proper position to execute this lift, your
shoulders have to be placed into an extreme
externally rotated position, and this forces
the subscapularis, which is one of the four
small rotator cuff muscles, into an overly
stretched position.
Now this is fine if you’re simply sitting
there with your arms suspended in the air,
but add a heavy barbell into the equation,
which then has to be pressed up and down close
to the point of muscular failure and you end
up creating a very risky scenario for yourself.
The rotator cuff is a small, delicate group
of muscles and tendons that act to stabilize
your shoulder joint, and they are not designed
to lift heavy loads like this.
Overly stress these muscles to the point of
injury and your entire upper body training
routine and even some of your lower body lifts
like your squats or your barbell lunges are
going to suffer, potentially irreversibly.
Now is it possible that someone could perform
behind-the-neck presses consistently without
sustaining an injury?
Well sure, it’s perfectly possible and many
lifters have done so for months and years
and still don’t end up running into any
real problems.
However, I really can't think of any good
reason why you should take the risk.
Performing overhead presses behind your neck
is not going to give you any added benefit
in comparison to performing them to the front,
or in comparison to performing them seated
using dumbbells, which is the variation that
I ultimately would recommend.
Pressing weights overhead from the front is
a natural movement pattern for the human body
and it will allow you to effectively stimulate
your shoulder muscles without putting your
rotator cuffs at risk assuming that you’re
training with proper form of course.
The main argument that most lifters who are
in favor of the behind-the-neck presses give
is that it targets the lateral head of the
shoulder, which is the middle portion, more
effectively than a press from the front.
And while this may be true to a degree, it’s
still irrelevant in the big picture since
the anterior delt, which is the front head,
still remains as the prime mover regardless,
and the majority of the lateral deltoid stimulation
and growth that you achieve in your program
is going to come as a result of your side
lateral raises anyway.
So regardless of how you perform an overhead
press, whether it's to the front or behind
the neck it's still ultimately a front delt
exercise.
And for these reasons, I would recommend that
you remove behind the neck presses from your
routine because there’s really no upside
and there is a very serious potential downside.
To get the same muscle building effects while
keeping your shoulder joints safe and healthy,
stick with a barbell military press to the
front, or even better, a seated overhead dumbbell
press.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did find the information helpful please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future video lessons.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
And make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.