For maximizing hypertrophy, should low, 
moderate, or high repetition numbers be used?
Well, as we've mentioned in other 
videos, there's a great number of  
studies finding loads between 80% one-rep 
max and 30% one-rep max produce similar  
muscle hypertrophy, so long as repetitions 
are performed to or very close to failure.
Very broadly, this equates to 
performing between 8 and 35 repetitions.
But, what about fewer than 8 repetitions?
Say 5 repetitions, for example. Could 
this still optimize hypertrophy?
For quite a while, I automatically 
assumed there was good evidence showing  
5 repetitions could build muscle optimally.
In fact, I've previously said in videos reps 
between 5 and 35 are similarly effective  
for hypertrophy, provided repetitions 
are performed to or close to failure.
However, a new study by Vann et al. made 
me re-assess this belief and re-examine the  
research on rep ranges, and now I'm less certain 
if 5 repetitions could optimally build muscle.
Let us overview this study, 
discuss its limitations,  
and then detail how it relates to 
the overall rep range research.
Vann et al. recruited 15 trained men 
with an average back squat of 167kg.  
For these subjects, this equated to 
them squatting 1.9x their bodyweight.
Each subject had one leg assigned 
to a high load condition,  
and their other leg assigned 
to a high volume condition.
Both legs were trained on the unilateral 
leg extension and unilateral leg press,  
three times per week for a total of 6 weeks.
With the leg assigned to the high load 
condition, they performed 3 sets of 5  
repetitions on both exercises every session. 
They also progressed load weekly by 2.5%.
During the first week, they trained with 
82.5% of the pre-study one-rep maxes on both  
exercises, and they progressed this load by 
2.5% each week such that by the 6th week,  
they were training with 95% of their 
pre-study one-rep maxes on both exercises.
With the leg assigned to the high volume 
condition, they performed the program on-screen.
They trained with sets of 10 repetitions with 60%  
one-rep max loads. They did not progress 
this load whatsoever throughout the study.  
By the 6th week, they were still training 
with 60% of their pre-study one-rep maxes.
What they did progress, however, was 
the volume (in the form of sets).
During the first weeks, they mainly 
performed 1 to 2 sets per exercise.  
But during the later weeks, they mainly 
performed 3 or 4 sets per exercise.
Before and after the study, a 
range of measurements was assessed.
The main one we'll explore is 
cross-sectional area of the vastus lateralis  
(which is an indictor of 
vastus lateralis hypertrophy).
After the study, the researchers 
found increases in vastus lateralis  
cross-sectional area were greater for the high 
volume condition versus the high load condition.  
In fact, the high load condition 
saw on average no gains.
In other words, performing sets of 10 reps with a 
60% one-rep max load, and progressing set numbers  
but not load, produced more hypertrophy than 
performing sets of 5 reps and progressing load.
These findings are highly interesting, 
especially when considering how the two  
conditions differed in the set numbers they 
performed and how close to failure they trained.
Exploring set numbers first, despite the high 
volume condition progressing their set numbers  
across the 6 weeks, they still ultimately did not 
perform as many sets as the high load condition.
The high load condition performed 
18 weekly sets for the quads,  
whereas the high volume condition only 
averaged 15 weekly sets for the quads.
Despite these differences, the high volume 
condition still experienced more growth.
As for how close to failure they trained, we know 
the high volume condition involved performing sets  
of 10 reps with a 60% one-rep max load, and they 
did not progress load at all throughout the study.
As you can probably perform 
20 maximum repetitions,  
give or take a few, with a 60% one-rep max 
load, this group would have been training  
10 or so reps away from failure per 
set. This is very far from failure.
Opposingly, the high load condition 
performed sets of 5 reps with loads that  
likely meant they were largely training 
0 to 3 reps away from failure per set.
Despite the high volume condition training much 
further from failure than the high load condition,  
they experienced more vastus 
lateralis hypertrophy.
Let us now go through some limitations and 
considerations with this Vann et al. study,  
and then try and figure out how it 
fits into the rest of the literature.
Firstly, we know that by the end of the study, 
the high volume condition saw greater increases  
in vastus lateralis cross-sectional 
area versus the high load condition.
These after study measurements were taken 3 
days after the final training session. However,  
the researchers also took this measurement 
again 10 days after the final training session.
For the high volume condition, they saw 
a numerical decrease in average vastus  
lateralis cross-sectional area from 3 days 
to 10 days after the final training session.  
Now, this change in cross-sectional area from 3 to 
10 days after the final session was not classified  
as statistically signficant. Even so, as the 
subjects did not train in these days after the  
final session, this numerical decrease in muscle 
size can likely just be attributed to detraining.
However, for the high load condition, they 
saw a numerical increase in average vastus  
lateralis cross-sectional area from 3 days 
to 10 days after the final training session.  
Now, this change in cross-sectional area from 3 to 
10 days after the final session was not classified  
as statistically signficant, but it's nonetheless 
difficult to say why the numerical average did  
increase given they were not training. Perhaps it 
was some sort of delayed supercompensation thing.
Overall, I don't really think any of this 
changes the interpretation of the study.  
After all, 3 days after the final training 
session, the high volume condition  
still experienced more vastus lateralis 
hypertrophy than the high load condition.  
I just nonetheless thought it would be worth 
sharing this slightly peculiar finding.
The second limitation/consideration is 
the study only included 15 trained men,  
which like most resistance training 
studies, is a very small sample size.  
Larger sample sizes would likely be more 
informative and strengthen the data.
As a final limitation/consideration, 
the study was only 6 weeks,  
which is on the shorter side of typical 
resistance training studies we see.
Hypertrophy is not a quick process, 
especially in trained individuals,  
so it would be interesting to see how this 
study design plays out in the longer term.
Moving forward, what are the potential 
takeaway from this Vann et al. study,  
and how does it relate to 
the rest of the literature?
Two potential takeaway are that maybe 
there could be something special about  
progressing set numbers for hypertrophy and/or 
5 reps are simply suboptimal for hypertrophy.
The first one, that there's some special 
about progressing set numbers for hypertrophy,  
is difficult to verify. There simply is no 
other research (I'm aware of) exploring how  
progressing set numbers over weeks compares to 
training with the same number of weekly sets.  
As a result, there really is 
not much else to comment here,  
we can only hope that future 
research provides further insight.
As for the second one, could 5 reps 
simply be suboptimal for hypertrophy?
What does the rest of the research say?
The table on screen summarizes all 
the current research (I'm aware of)  
exploring how 5 or so reps compares 
to higher rep numbers for hypertrophy.
I should note all studies had subjects perform 
their reps to or very close to failure.
All of them indicate 5 or so reps were similarly 
effective to higher rep numbers for hypertrophy,  
indicating 5 or so reps might be 
perfectly optimal for hypertrophy.
However, all but one of them also had confounders.
More precisely, the subjects training with 5 or 
so reps performed more sets per exercise and/or  
used longer rest intervals between sets than 
the subjects training with higher rep numbers.
In many cases, performing more sets per exercise 
and resting longer between sets (particularly  
resting longer between sets of compound 
exercises) seems to be better for hypertrophy.
Thus, I think we could argue 
much of these studies were  
biased towards the subjects 
training with 5 or so reps.
If set numbers and rest interval durations 
were equated between all subjects, maybe  
training with 5 reps would have been suboptimal 
compared to training with higher rep numbers.
Now, one study by Weiss et 
al. did actually have all  
subjects train with the same set 
numbers and rest interval durations.
This study did actually find that 3-5 reps 
were similarly effective to 13-15 reps  
and 23-25 reps for building muscle.
Nevertheless, combining the Vann et al. 
study with the rest of this overall data,  
it's clear to see it is far from crystal 
clear as to whether 5 reps can truly be  
optimal and efficient for hypertrophy.
More research is going to be 
highly valuable and insightful.
At the end of the day, it's really your choice on 
how you interpret all the data we've overviewed.
If your main goal is to maximize hypertrophy, and 
you've been training with 5 reps and experiencing  
perfectly fine hypertrophy, I don't think 
there's any solid reason to change anything.
However, if you have been experiencing 
subpar hypertrophy from sets of 5  
and/or you'd just like to err on the side 
of caution to ensure you're maximizing  
hypertrophy most efficiently, it might be 
sensible to avoid training with 5 reps,  
at least for the time being until 
there's further future research.
As noted at the start of this video, there's 
a good number of studies demonstrating with  
all other training variables equal, 8-35 
reps are similarly effective for building  
muscle so long as repetitions are 
performed to or close to failure.  
As a result, it may be sensible to 
stay within this repetition range.