We now have two meta-analyses indicating light 
loads can produce similar muscle growth to heavier  
loads, provided repetitions are performed to or 
close to failure. Meta-analyses combine the  
results of numerous studies looking at the same 
topic. In the two meta-analyses, most studies had  
subjects use loads between 30% and 85% of their one 
rep max,roughly equating to repetitions between 35  
and 5. But, what about repetitions below 5?
Last video, we demonstrated the research suggests  
one rep max training is not effective at building 
muscle. This video, we'll evaluate research exploring  
repetitions between 2-4 for building 
muscle. On the bottom left and right we'll be  
keeping a tally of the study supporting or 
opposing the effectiveness of repetitions  
below 5. Starting things off, Schoenfeld 
and colleagues split 19 men with at least  
one year of training experience into a heavy or 
moderate group. Both groups trained the bench press,  
overhead press, lat pull down, cable row, back 
squat, leg press, and leg extension for 3
sets and 2minutes of rest between sets, 3
times per week for 8 weeks. The heavy group  
used a load that allowed them to perform 
2 to 4 repetitions to failure each set.  
The moderate group used a load allowing 
them to perform 8 to 12 repetitions  
to failure each set. Both groups aimed to 
progressively overload throughout the study.  
Increases in vastus lateralis thickness were 
significantly greater for the moderate group.  
Increases in elbow flexor thickness also favor the 
moderate group, while triceps thickness increases  
were similar between both groups. So overall, this study indicates 2 to 4 reps is not as  
effective as 8 to 12 reps. Weiss and colleagues 
split 44 untrained men into a low rep, moderate  
rep, or high rep group. All groups trained 4 sets 
of the back squat with 6 minutes of rest between  
sets, 3 times per week for seven weeks. The 
low rep group used a 3 to 5 rep max load  
Each set, the moderate rep group used a 13 to 15 
rep max load each set.. The high rep group used a  
23 to 25 rep max load each set. All groups aimed 
to progressively overload throughout the study.  
Increases in quadriceps thickness were similar 
between all three groups, suggesting reps below 5  
are effective for maximizing muscle 
growth. Managine and colleagues divided  
33 men, with at least two years of training 
experience, into an intensity or volume group.  
Both groups trained 4 times per week for 
8 weeks. The program is listed on screen.  
The intensity group performed each exercise for 
4 sets of 3 to 5 reps with a 90
% one rep max load and 3 minutes of 
rest between sets. The volume group performed each  
exercise for 4 sets with 10 to 12 reps with 
a 70% one-rep max load and 1 minute of  
rest between sets. Both groups aim to progressively 
overload throughout the study.Increases in rectus  
femoris, vastus lateralis, pectoralis major , and triceps brachii cross-sectional area were  
statistically similar between both groups. They 
also measured increases in lean leg and arm mass  
via DEXA scans. Increases in lean leg mass were 
similar between both groups. But, increases in  
arm mass were significantly greater in the 
intensity group. So, 3 to 5 reps were equally  
as effective as 10 to 12 reps in most measures and 
actually superior in a lean arm mass measurement.  
One limitation of this study was the intensity 
group used 3 minutes of rest between sets,  
while the volume group used only 1 minute. 
In our rest interval video, we demonstrate the  
research suggests with compound exercises, 2.5 or 
more minutes of rest between sets was superior for  
building muscle compared to rest intervals of 1 
minute or less. With this in mind, the volume group  
would probably have been at a disadvantage. If they 
used a 3-minute rest interval, they could have  
experienced greater growth for all measures. 
Another study by Schoenfeld and colleagues  
split 17 men with at least one year of training 
experience into a strength group or hypertrophy  
group. Both groups trained the same exercises 3
times per week for 8 weeks. The hypertrophy  
group used a bodybuilding split schedule, while 
the strength group used a full body schedule.  
The hypertrophy group trained each exercise with 
3 sets of 10 reps to failure and 90 seconds of  
rest between sets. The strength group trained 
each exercise with 7 sets of 3 reps to failure  
with 3 minutes of rest between sets. Both 
groups aimed to progressively overload. 
Volume load, the product of sets X  reps X 
load, was equated between the two groups, explaining  
why the strength group needed 7 sets per 
exercise and the hypertrophy group only 3
sets. Increases in biceps thickness were similar 
between both groups, supporting the effectiveness  
of repetitions below 5 for building muscle. 
However, similar to the previous study, the  
strength group used a 3-minute rest interval, while 
the hypertrophy group used only a 90-second rest  
interval.Also, the researchers justified equating 
volume load by suggesting volume load was strongly  
correlated to muscle growth. Therefore, equating 
it between groups would avoid this potential  
confounding effect. However, strong evidence 
indicates with all else equal, reps between 5 and  
35 produce similar muscle growth. Within this range, with the same number of sets performed, volume load  
would be dramatically different. Suggesting volume 
load is not strongly correlated to hypertrophy.  
If it was, higher repetition should cause more 
growth. but this isn't the case. Furthermore, we have  
research indicating more sets generally result in 
more hypertrophy (probably up to a certain point). 
Considering all this, the strength group was 
probably put at an advantage with the more sets.  
Nevertheless, moving on, Campos and colleagues spit 
27 untrained men into a low rep, intermediate rep,  
or high rep group. All group trained the leg press , squat, and leg extension for 8 weeks, 3
times per week for the first 4 weeks and 4
times per week for the last 4 weeks. The low rep  
group trained to each exercise for 4 sets with 
a 3 to 5 rep max load to failure and 3
minutes of rest between sets. The intermediate rep 
group trained each exercise for 3 sets with  
a 9 to 11 rep max load to failure and 2 minutes of 
rest between sets. The high rep group trained
each exercise for two sets with a 20 to 28 rep max 
load to failure and 1 minute of rest between sets.  
Volume load was equated between groups, explaining 
why the groups used a different number of sets/  
Increases in vastus lateralis type 1, type 2a,and 
type 2b fiber cross sectional area were similar  
between the low rep and intermediate rep group, and 
both greater than the high rep group, supporting  
the effectiveness of repetitions below 5 for 
building muscle. That said, equating volume load  
and the use of different rest intervals between 
groups are again potential confounding factors.  
Chestnut and Docherty split 19 untrained men 
into a 4RM group or a 10RM group. Both groups  
trained the close grip bench press, triceps press 
down, barbell curl, and dumbbell curl. These were  
the core exercises. They also trained the normal 
bench press, bench pulls, and shoulder press. These  
were the supplemental exercises. These exercises 
were trained 3 times per week for 10 weeks.  
The 4RM group used 4 reps with an 85 
percent one rep max load to failure and 3
minutes of rest between sets. Each session, 6 
sets were used for each core exercise and 2 sets  
for each supplemental exercise. The 10RM group 
use 10 reps with a 70 one rep max load to failure  
and 2minutes of rest between sets. Each session, 3 sets were used for each core exercise and  
1 set for each supplemental exercise. Increases 
in cross-sectional area for the middle and lower  
portion of the upper arm (which included 
the triceps biceps and brachialis muscles)  
were similar between both groups, supporting the 
effectiveness of reps below 5 for building muscle.  
Again, equating volume load and the use of 
different rest intervals are potential confounding  
factors in this study. To sum up, the majority 
of the evidence supports the idea reps between  
2 and 4 are effective for building muscle. Having said this, of the 5 studies finding this,  
4 either had the low rep group perform 
more sets, in attempt to equate volume load,  
and or the low rep groups used longer rest intervals.
Based on the reasons provided in the video, these  
are probably confounding factors. Interestingly, 
the only two studies that did not have these  
confounding factors are in disagreement with 
each other. Weiss and colleagues suggest 3 to  
5 reps can maximize growth, whereas Schoenfeld 
and colleagues indicates 2 to 4 reps do not.  
Small differences, such as the use of 2 reps 
in the Schoenfeld and colleague study and the  
use of 3 reps in the Weiss and colleague study 
could be a reason for these different results.  
Nevertheless, more research that avoids confounding 
factors is most definitely needed. What is clear  
is that reps between 2 to 4 do have the 
capacity to build significant muscle. As most of  
the studies in this video did, perhaps you may have 
to perform more sets than usual and ensure longer  
rest intervals to achieve this. Note, in most of the 
studies mentioned here strength gains, so one rep
max gains, were greater for the low rep groups. 
Therefore, if your priority is strength gains, 
but you would like some degree of hypertrophy, 
using reps between 2 to 4 is probably very  
effective. If your goal is hypertrophy, to er on the 
side of caution, it's probably sensible to ensure  
most of your training is done in the 5 to 35 rep 
zone. There does exist some interesting research  
exploring reps higher than 35 for building muscle. I plan to cover this in the next video. After that,  
we'll explore if using different rep ranges 
in your program could improve muscle growth.
:)