What’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, SeanNal.com.
And today we’re going to be going over some
holiday diet tips.
It’s that time of year and a lot of people
have been asking me for advice on what they
should do to stay on track with their diet
during Christmas time.
So, let’s talk a little bit about it.
So, first things first, assuming that you
do celebrate the holidays, and that the food
aspect is something that you really enjoy
and that you do want to indulge in, my first
and my main piece of advice is to just chill.
I get that you have fitness goals, you don’t
want to fall off track with things but keep
in mind that the purpose of the holidays is
to relax and to enjoy your time, you know,
with your friends and family.
And if you start obsessing about every calorie
you’re eating and heavily restricting yourself
then you’re just going to be adding a whole
extra layer of stress on top that really doesn’t
need to be there, and you won’t be able
to truly unwind and just appreciate the time.
So, don’t think “here’s my fitness program
and how do I make the holidays fit into this”.
Think “here’s the holidays, how do I reasonably
make my fitness program fit into this?”
When you look back on your life and if someone
asks you if there’s anything you regret,
you’re probably not going to say, “I wish
I had track my macros more accurately on Christmas
Eve”.
I could be wrong but probably not.
Now, that said, I’m not anybody’s life
coach here and everyone is obviously different.
And so, how you choose to go about it, will
depend on your specific fitness goals and
then what the holidays is actually look like
for you.
So, let me go over three scenarios here and
I’ll give a few tips throughout.
So, scenario number one is the more extreme
route.
So, maybe you’re preparing for a fitness
competition, or you need to be in a very specific
shape by a certain date, and you made up your
mind staying fully on track with your program
absolutely is your number one priority or
maybe Christmas time just isn’t a big deal
for you to begin with and you don’t feel
any real desire to indulge in the first place.
That’s fair enough.
And in that case, you can just continue doing
whatever you were doing previously in terms
of nutritional tracking by knowing what your
calories and your macros are.
And continuing to just count them and using
basic willpower to stay within your nutritional
limits.
Scenario number two is on the complete opposite
end of the spectrum which is just to fully
let go and just eat whatever you feel like
in whatever amounts you’d like.
Now, there’s nothing objectively wrong with
this approach either, as long as you’re
aware of what you’re doing, why you’re
doing it and what the possible consequences
might be.
How it specifically affects your fitness goals?
Really just depends on how many calories you’re
actually going over by and for what period
of time.
So, if it’s just for a few days and you’re
not going completely off the charts insane,
the impact is going to be very minor if anything.
Whereas, if it’s for two or three-week straight
and you are going completely insane, then
yeah, it is going to affect your physique
to some degree, you’re obviously going to
gain some fat.
Is that a big deal?
Depending on the person, maybe, maybe not.
If you’re still in the beginning stages
of your fitness plan, and you start just fully
binging during the holidays for an extended
period of time, and you end up erasing a bunch
of the progress you’ve made, and that causes
you to lose motivation and fall off track
in the bigger picture then yes, it could have
some legitimate negative consequences.
On the other hand, if you’re more experienced
and you say, “You know what?
I’m just going to go ahead and just fully
enjoy myself this Christmas.
I’m going to eat and drink whatever I feel
like, maybe I do gain 3 pounds of fat.
But I’ll just go ahead and diet for a week
or two in January and burn it back off”.
That’s a perfectly viable option.
As long as you know what you’re doing and
you feel that it’s worth the trade-off.
So yeah, either of those two extremes, either
continuing to track everything and being very
strict or tracking absolutely nothing and
going a 100 percent all out, both of those
approaches can be fine for some people, depending
on the circumstances as long as it’s being
done consciously.
Now, that said as with most things there is
a middle ground in there somewhere.
And I think that that middle ground is probably
what will apply and work best for the both
of you guys who are watching this, which means
allowing yourself to relax loosening things
up, enjoying those holiday food and drinks
but still being mindful about what you’re
doing and not going too far overboard with
it because again, you have to think not just
in terms of how the excess calories are going
to affect your progress right now, but also
how it might affect your progress once the
holidays are over in terms of maintaining
your focus and your motivation moving forward.
So, in terms of practical tips, if you’ve
been in a cutting phase and your goal is to
lose fat, you can attempt to maintain your
calorie deficit but another good approach,
assuming that the food aspect of the holidays
is something you really enjoy, is to just
treat this time as a diet break for maybe
one or two weeks and just eat roughly around
your calorie maintenance level or in a small
surplus.
It’s not going to negatively impact your
results.
Even if you do eat in a surplus, a good percentage
of those calories will be diverted to lean
muscle growth anyway, as long as you’re
still training.
And if you’ve been in a deficit for a while,
then a diet break can actually be a useful
tool to give you a nice physical and mental
boost.
On the other hand, if you’ve been bulking
and you’re already in a surplus then you
can just keep that surplus in place or just
be a bit more generous with it.
In terms of actual nutritional tracking, this
can be a bit of a challenge because a lot
of the items are going to be homemade.
So, just do your best to roughly estimate
and go by feel.
Being a few 100 calories off is not a big
deal in the short-term.
Losing fat and building muscle is all about
what you do in the big picture.
So, don’t stress yourself out too much with
it.
Just try to approximately ballpark it.
If you do want to be a bit more precise then
the best option is to just take whatever homemade
item you’re eating and then look up an equivalent
item using a nutrition database like my Fitness
Pal or CalorieKing, there’s a bunch of different
ones that you can use.
So, for example, if you’re eating, let’s
say a homemade Nanaimo bar or a homemade slice
of apple pie, look up the nutritional content
for those items online and just use those
as an estimation.
It’s definitely not going to be perfect
but it really doesn’t need to be perfect
either.
And again, if we’re talking just about a
few days here and there where your food intake
is going to be particularly higher, so let’s
say, you know Christmas eve, Christmas day
and New Years, I wouldn’t even worry about
specifically tracking anything besides just
some very basic estimation.
I would say, just enjoy yourself and don’t
worry about it because short periods like
that aren’t going to be enough to have any
real detrimental effect.
And there’s no point in stressing yourself
out during times like that when you should
just be relaxing and having fun.
And then one other tip you can use on days
where you will be eating those bigger higher
calorie meals and snacks is to intentionally
lower your calorie intake in the earlier portion
of the day so that you can save up calories
for later on.
An intermittent fasting style approach is
one option or you can just make an effort
to eat a bit less earlier on, in that way
you can just enjoy yourself later with less
of a chance of going overboard on total calories.
So, I don’t want this to drag on for too
long here.
Bottom line guys, take it easy and enjoy the
holidays.
In the grand scheme of your life, you’re
probably going to get more fulfillment from
enjoying your time with friends and family
than you are from having a six-pack.
So, find a good middle ground in there where
you can let loose and indulge.
But also do it mindfully and keep a rough
tab on your food intake if holiday eating
is something that extends beyond just a couple
days for you.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope this was helpful.
If it was, make sure to hit the like button,
leave a comment and subscribe.
You can access my complete body transformation
blueprint, that includes my recommended workouts,
eating plans and supplement guides along with
one-on-one coaching by clicking here or by
heading over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
The official website is SeanNal.com.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks again guys and I’ll see in the next
video.