What’s going on, guys. Sean Nalewanyj here
www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video here I’m going to be giving
you an honest no BS review of the Shredz Men’s
Supplement lines. Keep in mind, that there
is overlap between a men’s and women’s
lines, if you’re watching this and you are
female. Shredz has become a hugely popular
company over the last year or two, mainly
because all of the marketing that they’ve
done mostly through Instagram. However, most
of the Shredz reviews that you’ll find out
there are honestly not very well to put together
at all. They’re not accurate, they’re
not science based and a lot of them are heavily
biased as well, because they’re put out
by people who have a vested interest in you
buying the products. I’m not going to go
into any details here on the whole Shredz
controversy that’s been going on with the
Photoshop pictures and the fake, transformation
contests, and the [Indiscernible] or not status
some of their athletes. That’s not what
this video is about. This is just going to
be an honest objective look at their actual
supplement line based on the ingredients they
used, the dosages and the cost. I’ve been
researching fitness supplementation for over
fifteen years now. I’m not affiliated with
any supplement companies. And my only goal
is to give you the honest facts so that you
can make the smartest and the most cost-effective
decisions for your fitness programs, simple
as that. So first off is their protein powder.
There’s nothing really fancy here. This
is just a standard tub of whey concentrate
and whey isolate, and based on the label it
doesn’t look like it’s been amino spiked
using any cheap fillers, so that’s a good
thing, assuming the label’s accurate. You
get 23 grams of protein per 30 grams scoop.
2 ½ carbs and 1 ½ fats, pretty standard
like I said. So, no issue with the product
itself. However, the only problem here in
my view is just the price. If you’re using
protein powder consistently as part of your
diet then there’s no real reason to be buying
it in a small two pond tubs like this, because
the cost per serving for that is really high
in comparison to just buying a bigger five
pound tub. With Shredz whey protein you’re
paying $40 for thirty servings, which is $1,33
per serving. Whereas if you bought, for example
a five pound tub of Optimum Nutrition whey,
which is the one that I used, very popular,
widely used brand, you’ll be paying about
seventy-five cents per serving which is quite
a bit less. Now, to put that into perspective,
if you were to use a two scoops of protein
powder a day then you’d save over $400 a
year just from that alone. And this is just
one example and I’ll link my free supplement
guide in the description box below, which
includes all of my recommended protein powders
that are high quality and cost-effective as
well. So, the Shredz whey protein itself isn’t
bad but it’s just pretty expensive per serving
in comparison to other available options.
Next up is the Shredz Alpha Testosterone,
which is their natural testosterone booster.
I talked about this many times in the past
but the fact is that natural over-the-counter
testosterone boosters are not going to be
effective for the purpose of improving muscle
growth or fat loss. In order to actually gain
any noticeable muscle size and strength from
these type of products your test levels would
have to be elevated by a very high percentage
and sustained overtime. And there isn’t
a single natural supplement out there that’s
actually going to do that for you. There’s
just no good research to back that up. Some
ingredients can be useful for improving libido,
so if that’s a concern for you then it might
be worth looking into. But if your goal is
to gain more muscle and lose more fat then
I definitely don’t recommend bothering with
any natural testosterone boosters. And aside
from that the Shredz products is based off
of a proprietary blend anyway, which is a
really common technique that supplement companies
used as a way to under dose their products
and saved on cost. I’m not definitively
saying that Shredz is doing that but that’s
what proprietary blends are pretty much always
used for in this industry. Basically like
you can see here, they list off a bunch of
different ingredients and give you the total
amount for all of them combined but not the
individual dosage per ingredient. And this
makes the label look great because it includes
so many recognizable ingredients but what
it does is allow the company to just sprinkle
in small amounts of some or all of them as
away to save on cost because they know that
the average person is really just responding
to the marketing behind the product and ultimately
won’t know the difference. And then in terms
of the actual formula, the first ingredient
here is Spanish Pellitory, which is a newer
compound that only has rat research behind
it as far as I know. And the second ingredient
is maca, which is effective for boosting libido
but the proper dosage for maca for most guys
is already higher than the amount of the entire
blend of all five ingredients combined. So,
there’s really no point in going further
on this one. It’s not going to boost testosterone
levels into any sort of muscle building range.
It’s under dosed. And it also cost $60,
which is extremely expensive for these type
of products as well. If you really want to
waste your money on a natural test booster,
then there are plenty of other way cheaper
options out there that are better formulated
than this as well. Next up is their creatine
product. Which is a combination of magnesium
creatine chelate, and then another proprietary
blend with beta-alanine as the main ingredient.
First off, like I’ve said a million times
before, there’s no research out there that
shows any form of creatine to be more effective
than basic creatine monohydrate. And the reason
companies market these new and improved forms
of creatine is because they sound a lot more
exciting than basic creatine monyhdrate does,
and as a result they can charge way more money
for it. Creatine monohydrate is the most researched
sport supplement in the world and has an extremely
high absorption rate in humans. It fully saturates
the muscles after two or three weeks of used.
And it has no side effects in otherwise healthy
people when used properly. It’s not that
the creatine they’re using here is necessarily
bad, but there’s just no reason to pay multiple
times the cost when you can get all the benefits
you need just by using monohydrate instead.
As for the beta alanine the proprietary blend
here gives you 2.2 grams for beta-alanine,
L-Arginine and vanadyl sulfate combined when
the proper dose for beta-alanine alone is
a minimum of 3.2 grams. So you could already
see that this is under dosed which backs up
what I said earlier about proprietary blends
being used for that purpose. And then on top
of that vanadyl sulfate and L-Arginine are
useless ingredients anyway when it comes to
muscle growth and training performance. So
basically, you’re paying $50 a bottle for
overpriced creatine and under dosed beta-alanine.
What you could do instead is just buy pure
creatine monohydrate on its own, which will
cost about three cents per gram. Beta-alanine
on its own for six cents a gram, and then
just take them at their proper dose and you’ll
pay about ten bucks a month instead of fifty
and get even better results. Next up is the
Shredz Fat Burner Max. Once again all of the
ingredient dosages are hidden behind proprietary
blend. Surprise, surprise. So you really have
no clue what you’re actually getting here,
or more accurately what you’re probably
not getting. The main ingredient is African
mango seed, which was a heavily marketed weight
loss miracle a couple years back but it’s
faded out instead, and it’s normally used
as an appetite suppressant that’s taken
before meal. So I really don’t know why
they use that as the main ingredient in a
pre-workout fat burner. That really doesn’t
make sense. But of course all you have to
do with any fat burner is throw in some caffeine.
Because that way, no matter what else is included
or how ineffective it might be, or how under
dosed it might be people are going to take
the product, they’re going to feel the energy
boost and then assume that the product is
effective because of that. The reality is
that basic caffeine and hydrase is the driving
force behind pretty much every single pre-workout
product, fat burner and energy drink out there.
It is effective but that doesn’t mean that
you need to pay $75 a bottle for it, which
is the cost of the Shredz Fat Burner. Now
I’m not going to say the $75 a bottle is
an absolutely insane, borderline criminal
price for a fat burner but, yeah. So honestly,
it’s impossible to review this fat burner
any further because you have no idea what
you’re actually taking. Since all the dosages
are hidden. I wonder why. And weighing off
of that fact along with the ingredient profile,
and the $75 per bottle price, I think the
choice is pretty obvious here. Next up is
their BCAA Plus Glutamine. Now, I know a lot
of people out there do use BCAAs as well as
glutamine and swear by them, but I personally
don’t think they’re necessary for the
average trainee. Because if you’re getting
a sufficient amount of total dietary protein
each day then you already getting very high
amount of BCAAs and glutamine just from that
alone. And I’ve done a detailed post on
this in the past, outlining the science behind
why I don’t think they’re necessary and
I’ll link them in the description box below
if you want more information on that. But
regardless, even if you do supplement with
BCAAs and glutamine and you want to continue
using them you can still get it for way cheaper
than what Shredz is charging. The price for
this one here is $45 for thirty servings,
with 6 grams of BCAAs and 2 grams of glutamine.
Whereas instead you could just go with the
extend product from Scivation, which a pretty
popular one that you might be familiar with
because that’s actually gives you slightly
more BCAAs and slightly more glutamine per
serving. And it’s $24 per thirty serving
rather than $45. Again, I still wouldn’t
recommend spending your money on BCAAs and
glutamine but if you’re going to Shredz
is still much more expensive, almost double
the cost of other comparable products. Lastly,
and I’ll keep this one really quick, is
their Rebuild Formula, which is essentially
just a ZMA product. I’m not opposed to zinc
or magnesium supplementation because a lot
of hard training lifters can have lower levels,
but the problem with Shredz is that they’re
using magnesium oxide which is well known
to be the cheapest and lowest quality form
of magnesium you can get. So they saved money
and you get a product that you bought that
you can hardly even absorb. There are plenty
of brands out there using higher quality forms
like magnesium citrate, glucanate or diglycinates
and in keeping with the theme here Shredz’s
product is hugely overpriced anyway at $45
for thirty servings. So that covers everything,
guys. I think it’s probably pretty obvious
what my opinion is of Shredz supplements by
this point without me having to explicitly
say it. So I’ll just leave it at that. And
you can take the information here and decide
for yourself what you’d like to do. The
reality is that supplements only play a very
minor role in any muscle building or fat burning
program. Getting a real result primarily comes
down to proper training and proper nutrition.
And only a very small handful of supplements
out there are worth investing in. And even
then the results are still going to be modest.
You can download my free fitness supplementation
guide using the link in the description box
below. So thanks for watching, guys. I really
hope this was helpful. If you enjoyed this
science based, no BS approached to fitness
and you want to learn how to build muscle
and lose fat without any gimmicks or hype,
then you can visit www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking here or using the link in the
description box below to access my complete
Body Transformation Blueprint. You can follow
me on social media here. The official website
is www.SeanNal.com. And feel free to like,
comment, share and subscribe if you did enjoyed
the video. Thanks for watching, guys. And
I’ll talk to you again soon.