Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com, BodyTransformationTruth.com
with a bit of a different video for you today.
I just got back from the grocery store, about
to head over to the gym here.
But I was standing there and had this big
pile of groceries and thought why don’t
I just grab the camera and show you guys what
I eat throughout a typical day right now.
I'm actually just finishing up a 10-week cutting
phase.
I dropped about 15 pounds over that time.
I wasn't actually intending to lose that much
initially.
My original plan was maybe to go about 8 pounds
or so down.
But as I got leaner and leaner, I decided
it might be a good idea to just take it a
bit further and get some professional pictures
done for my website when I am fairly lean.
That’s something that I've never done before.
That's going to be on Tuesday.
So, I'm starting a water cut tomorrow for
the next three days just to really dry out
before those photos.
But I thought I would show you what I've been
eating over the last 10 weeks in order to
drop that initial 15 pounds.
So, this isn't going to be like a regular
full day of eating type of video.
I’m just going to separate it into different
categories.
So, I'll show you protein, carbs and fats
as well as a few just sort of miscellaneous
items that I have throughout the day, just
to give you some extra ideas and to show you
what I've been doing.
So, here it is.
So, starting with protein source, then just
going from left to right kind of in the order
that I have them throughout the day.
I always start my day off with a shake, because
I'm generally just not that hungry in the
morning, and I want to get out the door and
get to the gym as efficiently as I can.
So right now, I'm using scellucor core performance
whey as my protein powder.
This is the chocolate flavor.
It tastes really good, it mixes well.
It's a blend of isolate and concentrate.
It's not amino spiked, which is really important
as I’ve talked about before.
So, a very high quality product that I'm happy
with.
I also use optimum nutrition gold standard
whey and dymatize elite whey.
But I’m just using the scellucor brand at
the moment.
After that is eggs and egg whites.
Egg whites are awesome, because they're basically
just pure protein and it’s a really good
way to add more volume to your meal.
So, after the gym, I'll come back and have
one or two whole eggs mixed with usually about
100 to 150 grams of egg whites.
And again, adding the egg whites, just helps
you make a bigger portion size overall, without
really bumping the calories up too high.
Shrimp is not as common as sort of a standard
bodybuilding protein source, but I really
like it.
I have this for lunch.
And then for dinner is extra lean ground turkey,
which is high in protein, moderate fat and
basically zero carbs.
And then late at night for a snack is low-fat
Greek yogurt or actually this one is non-fat
Greek yogurt.
Depending on the brand you get, you’ll get
different macros.
This one is 17 grams of protein and 6 grams
of carbs for 175-gram serving.
And then this one here I don't usually have.
But for the next three days, I'm going to
be cutting my carbs quite a bit and upping
the protein as a way to you sort of shed water
for the photos that I'm getting done.
So, I’ll be having low fat cottage cheese
with canned salmon next in, and just put a
bit of salt and pepper on top.
So, these are just the protein sources that
I personally have at the moment.
There's plenty of other high quality options
out there.
Lean beef, chicken other types of fish and
seafood, lean pork these are just my personal
preferences right now.
So, next moving on to carb sources, frozen
mixed berries and oats, which I have with
my protein shake in the morning.
Bagels, obsessed with bagels, I love bagels,
can't get enough bagels, have this for lunch
and I also have it later in the day as well.
Regular soft berries, blueberries and strawberries,
I’ll usually mix that into my Greek yogurt
or just have it separately as a snack.
Another thing that I snack on as well are
rice cakes.
This is the tomato basil flavor.
Another regular sort of fitness staple, basmati
rice, that's what I have for lunch with my
shrimp.
And then for dinner with my ground turkey
is just a big assortment of different vegetables.
So, we got lettuce, onions, mushrooms, red
peppers, corn and asparagus.
And then of course lastly is my secret weapon,
which is Lucky Charms, the best breakfast
cereal in existence.
I've been told that they're discontinuing
it.
I hope that's not true.
I’ll pretty depressed if it is.
But I have that at the end of the day with
my Greek yogurt, and just fit it into my overall
diet as a whole.
So, again, these are just my carb sources
of choice.
There’s a lot of other options out there.
Basically, any type of fruit, any vegetable,
potatoes, yams, quinoa, pasta, peda these
are just the carb sources that I am basing
my diet around at the moment.
Now, when I’m cutting, I don't usually have
to go out of my way, just specifically adding
extra fat sources, because my calories are
lower, my fat intake is lower.
So, I'm going to get enough just from the
regular protein and carb sources that I eat.
But I do make sure to supplement with fish
out every day about 3 to 4 grams.
This is the citadel nutrition brand, just
make sure if you’re supplementing with fish
oil that it is ideally in the natural triglyceride
form, which this is one is.
And then, if I do want to add a specific healthy
fat source, I’ll just go with some natural
peanut butter.
Now, make sure that if you're consuming peanut
butter on a cut or any time for that matter,
that you are measuring it up properly, because
peanut butter is incredibly calorie dent.
There’s 100 calories in a tablespoon.
And what most people think is a tablespoon
is actually quite a bit more than what an
actual table spoon is.
So ideally, you should use a food scale.
One tablespoon is 15 grams, just something
to be aware of, because it’s a really easy
way to accidentally go quite a bit over your
calories for the day, if you are eating peanut
butter on a frequent basis.
So, just I thought I’d finish off here with
a few sort of miscellaneous items, just to
give you guys some extra ideas, I’m going
to show you some other things that I eat throughout
the day.
This is fat-free Kraft Italian dressing, tastes
really good and it's only 5 calories per tablespoon.
So, I use that on like my salads or my vegetables.
And you can use it pretty deliberately without
going overboard on calories.
A lot of you probably know about Walden Farms,
these are my two favorite products of theirs.
The pancake syrup, which just tastes awesome,
really good on pretty much anything.
And then, this is their chipotle ranch sauce,
which I put on my ground turkey, sometimes
on my eggs.
And again, both of these products are zero
calorie.
I don't usually use the ranch sauce if I am
eating at maintenance of balking, because
then I’ll just use something normal with
more calories that tastes a bit better.
But for a cutting phase, this is a really
good option.
Low calorie strawberry jam, this one is 6
grams of carbs for a tablespoon.
And I usually put that on my bagels.
Low sodium soy sauce, another good way to
flavor your foods while keeping the calories
low.
And then one of my absolute favorites when
I'm cutting, which a lot of people don't think
about, but that is Tzatziki sauce, because
it's basically just yogurts with cucumber
and spices mixed in.
You’ll get different macros again, depending
on which brand you use.
But this one here is about 20 calories per
tablespoon.
And I use that with my shrimp and rice.
Fat-free cheese is another thing that I use
here and there, 5 grams of protein, 2 carbs
and 0 fat per slice.
And I usually will just put that on my eggs.
I should also point out guys that the food
you just saw there are the foods that my diet
is primarily based around.
But it's obviously not all that I eat.
If you follow my content, then you know that
I'm a huge proponent of flexible dieting.
And this 10-week cutting phase, also included
weekly reefed days where I ate all kinds of
food including burgers, and pizza and ice
cream.
I also aim to fit in flexible foods here and
there whenever I can.
And I'm human just like anybody else.
So, I do slip up from time to time.
This cutting phase also included a trip to
my grandparents place out of town where I
probably ate about 6,000 of my grammas oatmeal
cookies.
Just remember that when it comes to fat loss
or gaining muscle, it's really all about what
you do over the big picture as a whole.
Unless you're preparing for a bodybuilding
show or some other event where you have to
be in a very specific shape by a specific
time, just focus on the big picture.
And don't worry too much if you do slip up
over the short-term.
Proper nutrition is all about the long-term.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope you enjoy the video, make sure to like,
comment and subscribe.
If you have any questions, just leave them
in the comments below.
And you can also check out my official blog
over at Seannal.com.
Talk to you again soon.