Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this video
I want to explain to you why protein powders
that add creatine into the mix are ultimately
a scam and why you should avoid them.
Now, this directly relates to the whole issue
of “amino acid spiking” which you may
have heard about by now, I did do a post on
that a while back and I’ll link it in the
description box below if you want more information,
but basically just to keep a long story short,
whey protein costs have very significantly
increased over the past few years, and because
a very high percentage of fitness supplement
companies are run by people who are far more
interested in making money as opposed to actually
putting out legit high quality products that
are going to help you, a lot of these companies
hae gone ahead and basically taken advantage
of loopholes in the system in order to cut
their production costs.
Now, along with adding free form l-taurine,
l-glycine and glutamine into the powders,
mixing in creatine is another method that’s
used, and it’s actually probably the worst
form of spiking that is being used right now.
So how how does this work exactly, well, I
want to keep this short, so without going
into all of the details, the total protein
gram amount that is listed on a tub of protein
powder is based on the total nitrogen content,
this is how protein powders are tested, and
because creatine contains nitrogen bonds,
it actually registers as part of the protein
total.
And not only that but some tests have actually
shown that creatine can register as high as
140% protein.
So if you took a standard 5 grams of creatine
per scoop let’s say, that could potentially
be adding up to 7 grams of protein to each
serving.
So if your protein powder lists 22 grams of
protein per scoop but it also contains creatine,
it’s possible that that could actually be
as low as 15 grams of protein.
And because creatine can be safely used at
doses even higher than 5 grams, it’s possible
that some companies are actually using even
more than that amount.
Creatine is tasteless so you’d really have
no way of knowing that it’s in there, and
most products won’t even list the creatine
amount so at the end of the day you really
don’t know what’s going on at all with
those products.
Now again, why do companies do this, well,
creatine is less expensive than whole proteins
are, and when you’re a big copmany that's
moving tens, or hundreds of thousands or even
millions of units of products, that small
amount that you're saving on each tub is going
to add up big time in the overall picture.
And it’s actually a “good scam” to run,
because creatine is such a recognizable ingredient,
a very high percentage of lifters use it,
so they’re going to see it on the label
and think, oh this is great I’m getting
25 grams of protein plus I'm getting my daily
serving of creatine without realizing that
the creatine itself is actually part of the
protein total.
So, bottom line here, creatine is a great
muscle building supplement, and I definitely
do recommend it, but it has no place in a
protein powder and it should always be purchased
separately.
So go ahead and check the ingredient label
on the protein powder that you're buying,
and if it has creatine listed, or as I've
talked about before, if it has l-taurine,
l-glycine or glutamine peptides added, then
leave it on the shelf.
And there are a ton of really good quality
whey protein products out there if you do
your research, I couldn’t possibly list
them all, but personally I use Optimum Nutrition
100% Whey and Dymatize Elite Whey, those are
the two I use at the moment, both are high
quality, legit powders and are reasonably
priced, and I’ll link those in the description
box below if you want to check them out.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more science-based, no B.S muscle building
and fat loss tips along with concrete step
by step plans that you can follow to maximize
your muscle building and your fat burning
progress, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.