Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I want to discuss what the
“best cardio exercises” are when it comes
to burning calories and improving your overall
conditioning.
Now it may not be the most enjoyable thing
in the world for a lot of trainees, but performing
regular cardio is something that I do recommend
for most people, and my suggestion here is
very simple, and that is that instead of choosing
your specific cardio exercises based on what
will “burn the most calories”, just go
with the ones that you enjoy the most and
that maximize your chances of sticking to
your cardio plan over the long term.
Now, just to be clear, what I’m referring
to here are the actual cardio exercises that
you choose (such as a treadmill or a stationary
bike) and not the specific cardio methodology
(such as low intensity/long duration or high
intensity/low duration).
As I’ve covered in previous videos, both
slower-paced cardio sessions in the 45-60
minute range as well as high intensity cardio
sessions in the 8-20 minute range, these both
have their own unique benefits, and most trainees
will probably be best off byperforming a mix
of both.
However, assuming that you have things already
laid out properly in terms of frequency, intensity
and duration, then the specific cardio exercises
that you use to meet those variables are really
up to you.
Fat loss and muscle growth are all about ongoing
long term consistency, and when it all comes
down to it, the “best cardio exercises”
are simply the ones that you’ll be most
likely to perform multiple days per week over
the long term.
For example, if you absolutely hate running
on a treadmill, then there's NO need to torture
yourself by using that as one of your cardio
methods.
Instead, go with a cardio machine that you
prefer better, such as a stairstepper, or
a stationary bike or rowing machine.
Or if you can’t stand traditional cardio
equipment altogether, then do something like
body weight intervals, or barbell complexes
or even kettlebell work.
You could jump rope.
You could hit a heavy bag.
You could swim.
If you’d rather go outdoors, then there’s
a million choices there as well, such as things
like cycling, or hiking, kayaking etcetera.
If you’re into sports, then another option
is to find a drop in league and use that as
one of your cardio methods.
A game of basketball, or soccer, or hockey,
etcetera.
all of these are great ways to get the fat
burning and cardio conditioning benefits that
you’re after while having fun at the same
time.
Another option is to take a look at the list
of classes that are offered at your gym and
see if anything interests you there.
Group cardio, a TRX class, even fast-paced
yoga – there’s really nothing wrong with
any of these choices when it all comes down
to it.
If you just a bit of time and put some thought
into it, then you should easily be able to
come up with a list of different activities
that you’d enjoy (or at the very least that
would be tolerable) while still allowing you
to get a good workout in.
Remember, the basic underlying purpose of
cardio is simply to burn additional calories,
and ANY form of exercise that allows you to
generate a sufficient amount of intensity
is going to allow you to do that.
Obviously there will be slight differences
in overall calorie expenditure from exercise
to exercise, but the overall variance is going
to be negligible and it isn’t likely going
to make much, if any difference in the overall
picture of things.
Now, the one caveat here is that if you are
someone who is looking to fully optimize their
body composition and their strength levels,
then you’ll obviously want to choose cardio
exercises that don’t measurably interfere
with your recovery in between your weight
training workouts.
It probably wouldn’t be wise, for example,
to do rock climbing as a cardio method immediately
before or after a back workout.
Or if you were training chest and triceps
in the next 24 hours, then you’d probably
want to avoid repetitive punching on a heavy
bag.
Or if you just performed heavy squats and
leg presses in the previous day then doing
explosive plyometrics or sprint intervals
probably wouldn’t be ideal.
Just use some proper planning and some common
sense to make sure that you choose cardio
exercises that don’t heavily involve the
muscles that you’ve just finished training
or that you're just about to train.
Again though, this assumes that you’re trying
to squeeze out 100% of your possible muscular
development and strength gains.
If that’s not necessarily the case for you,
then just go ahead and schedule your cardio
sessions in whatever way that you would personally
prefer.
So bottom line here, again, the basic underlying
purpose of cardio is to generate enough overall
intensity in order to burn a significant number
of calories, and there are an endless number
of different possible activities that will
allow you to do that beyond traditional treadmill
running or stationary biking.
And for that reason, choosing your cardio
exercises based on the specific activities
that you most prefer will, number 1, maximize
the chances of sticking to your cardio plan
long term, number 2, make your day to day
life more enjoyable in general, and number
3, do both of these things while still delivering
the same basic fat burning and cardio conditioning
results that you’re after.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to get some more highly effective
but practical fat burning and muscle building
tips just like this one along with concrete,
step by step training and nutrition plans
to follow, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System and you can do that by
clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.