Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
Now, the topic of building muscle can be made
extremely complicated.
We can obsess about every little detail behind
optimal training frequency, number of sets,
exercise selection, rep ranges, rep speed,
et cetera.
And yes, all these individual factors do need
to be addressed when you are structuring an
overall effective muscle building workout.
But at the heart of it all lays one key principle
that your entire training program should be
based around.
And if you don't give it your full attention
or even worse, if you overlook it all together,
you're completely ignoring the foundation
of the entire muscle building process.
And that one key principle is known as the
"Law of Progressive Overload".
To put it simply, the Law of Progressive Overload
states two very basic things.
The first is that you must train with a sufficient
level of intensity in order to stimulate your
body's muscle growth mechanism.
Muscle growth is an adoptive response to stress.
And if that stress doesn't across a certain
threshold, then your body ultimately has no
incentive to grow.
And the second thing is that you must consistently
increase the amount of weight lifted on each
exercise overtime.
In order for your muscles to continually increase
in size and strength, they have to be presented
with greater and greater amounts of stress
each workout.
So, if you want to get bigger and more muscular
overtime, you need to focus on systematically
increasing the amount of weight lifted and
the number reps performed every single time
you enter the gym.
If you were bench pressing 175lbs three months
ago, and you're still using the same weight
today, your chest is not going to have gotten
any bigger over that time.
So, to sum up the Law of Progressive Overload
in simple terms, train hard, focus on getting
stronger, repeat.
It doesn't matter how good you think your
workout plan is or how deeply you thought
it through, if you aren't grinding it out
in the gym by training at or close to your
limits every single time, and you aren't adding
weight to the bar consistently, you can be
guaranteed that you aren't going to be gaining
any real muscle either.
It's really as simple as that.
Progressive overload is the ultimate bottom
line, and it's the single most important factor
for determining if your workout plan is getting
the job done.
So, if you want the most powerful yet basic
piece of training advice possible, it's simply
this, get a notebook and a pen, and start
tracking every workout in detail.
Write down the exercises you performed, the
number of sets you did, and the number of
reps that you executed for each set.
Then the next time you enter the gym, your
entire goal is to beat the logbook by either
adding slightly more weight to the bar or
performing an extra rep or two using the same
weight.
Do this for every workout of every week of
every month of every year, and you'll be shocked
at how dramatically your gains accelerate.
Ninety percent of people in the gym don't
do this, and it's one of the major reasons
why 90% of people in the gym never make any
real progress.
So, yes, there are many factors that come
into play when structuring your overall workout.
But progressive overload is at the very foundation
and it's the first thing you need to get in
order, before worrying about anything else.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found this information useful.
If you did enjoy the video, please leave a
comment, like and make sure to subscribe to
stay up-to-date on future videos.
Also make sure to download your free 28-day
mass gaining plan, which includes a free workout,
meal plan and supplement guide.
You can find that in the description box,
the link is below.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night.
So, thanks again, for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.