What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, SeanNal.com,
RealScienceAthletics.com.
And in this video here, I want to talk a little
bit about the topic of food selection for
fat loss.
So this is a really common thing you'll see
in YouTube ads and videos, you know, blog
posts, social media posts, these sort of hyped
up titles that list off specific foods or
food groups that you must avoid because supposedly
they'll increase fat storage and make it impossible
for you to lean down.
Now before I dive into the subject, if you're
new to the channel here and you find this
advice helpful, then don't forget to hit that
subscribe button below to stay in the loop
on future videos and make sure to follow me
over on Instagram as well.
I post there every single day with additional
training, nutrition, supplementation, and
mindset advice that you'll definitely get
a lot of value from.
It's @Sean_Nalewanyj.
That's where you'll find me when I'm not here
on the YouTube channel.
So let's break this all down.
First of all, there is no such thing as any
one single food or any specific set of foods
that you literally can't eat or that are going
to lead to increased fat storage in and of
themselves.
People who think this way or looking at things
in too simplistic and too black and white
a fashion because they're taking all the different
foods that they're eating and they're viewing
them in isolation.
So this is a good food, this is a healthy
food, this is a bad food.
This is a fat storing food.
This is a fat burning food, etc.
In reality, the way to accurately look at
things and the way your body actually sees
your diet is by taking all the foods you eat,
not just that one meal or one snack, but for
the entire day, week and month as a whole,
and mixing them all together into one giant
mass.
And then from there, measuring the total calories,
the total protein, the total carbs and fat,
along with the total micronutrient and fiber
content of everything combined.
And when it comes to the goal of fat loss,
what truly matters is that in the overall
picture, the caloric total of everything you're
eating combined is less than the total calories
that you're expending.
Okay?
If that's the case and you're maintaining
it on a consistent basis, then you're going
to lose body fat, plain and simple.
You have a calorie deficit in place, you're
burning more energy than you're consuming,
and so your body's going to have no choice
but to break down its existing fat stores
to obtain a source of energy.
And this is why, when it all comes down to
it, there are no such thing as individual
food sources that are completely off limits
or that are magically going to result in fat
storage, assuming they fit into your overall
calorie target for the day.
So if you eat three clean meals, let's say
for breakfast, lunch and dinner, and then
you allow yourself to enjoy something later
on, maybe a chocolate bar, that chocolate
bar is not going to negatively impact your
fat-burning results if the two or 300 calories
that it contains fits into your total calories
for the day as a whole, and you still stay
in a net deficit after eating it.
But what a lot of people will do is they'll
demonize these foods and say, you know, "Oh,
I can't eat that because it's not healthy,
it's bad for me."
Or they'll even say to someone else, "You
really shouldn't eat that.
It's unhealthy, it's high in sugar," or whatever
else.
But they're saying these things without taking
the overall context into account.
And that can lead to unhealthy relationships
with food, unnecessary stress, less dietary
enjoyment, and it'll usually make your diet
harder to stick to because you'll feel overly
restricted and eventually burn out and then
probably end up binging excessively on those
very same foods that you were trying to avoid.
So that's sort of the underlying truth on
the topic.
You theoretically can eat anything and still
lose body fat if you're in a net deficit and
no individual foods are technically off limit.
However, it's of course not that simple.
And there are still some other important points
that we need to cover on this in order to
bring it all together in terms of practical
advice.
So one thing people will immediately say in
response to this idea is that fat loss is
not all about calories in versus calories
out.
And the specific foods that you eat will impact
how your body handles, say, 2000 calories
from one set of food versus 2000 calories
from another.
And that's absolutely true.
If you eat 2000 calories of potato chips and
ice cream, that's not going to produce the
same result as 2000 calories worth of high
quality protein and minimally processed carbs
and healthy fats.
Following a "cleaner diet" with a balanced
macronutrient breakdown, that's going to provide
the protein that you need for muscle recovery
and growth, it's going to have a higher thermic
effect, meaning that you'll burn more calories
through digestion and it'll be more micronutrient
rich, higher in fiber, better for your health,
better at controlling appetite.
So no question about that.
It is true in the absolute sense that fat
storing foods don't literally exist, but that
doesn't change the fact that for optimal results,
you still need to meet your total macronutrient
and micronutrient and fiber needs for the
day.
You could still lose weight eating nothing
but junk food, but you'd lose a higher percentage
of muscle relative to fat.
Your training performance and recovery would
go down, and it obviously wouldn't be ideal
for your health either.
A good general way to look at this is that
total calories in versus calories out will
determine whether you lose weight or gain
weight and then your macronutrient breakdown
and your food choices that will influence
what type of weight is gained or lost, whether
it's muscle or fat, as well as how your overall
health and your overall satiety is impacted.
And then the second point here is that for
most people, even if for some reason they
did want to structure their fat loss diet
around a large amount of high fat and high
sugar treat food, they wouldn't even be able
to do that anyway because those types of foods
are extremely calorie dense, meaning that
they pack a lot of calories into only a small
volume of food and so you'd likely run into
issues with hunger and you wouldn't even be
able to stick to your diet anyway because
the total food volume wouldn't be enough to
keep you feeling full.
And that leads me to the last point here,
which is that aside from blatant "junk food,"
this whole idea of foods you should avoid,
even though it's not true in the absolute
sense, in a practical sense, it can have some
value if we're talking about foods that people
might typically view as healthy but that are
actually very calorie dense.
And so just casually eating these foods, thinking
that it's good for you can actually make it
a lot more likely that you'll overshoot your
daily calories.
So that can be things like high sugar smoothies,
healthy oils, granola bars, trail mix, nuts.
Not that there's anything wrong with eating
nuts for example, but if you're just casually
snacking on a bag of almonds throughout the
day because you read that it's a healthy fat,
you're going to end up getting a ton of calories
without realizing it.
In that sense, you do you have to be careful.
These are not fat storing foods, but they
are foods that you need to moderate and to
be mindful of their calorie content.
A lot of different information there so far.
But just to sum this all up, there are no
such thing as fat storing foods that you must
avoid and there are no foods that will cause
fat storage in and of themselves if total
calories are controlled.
What there are, are foods that are more calorie
dense than others.
And so if you're going to add those foods
into your diet, you have to make sure that
they fit into your total calories and that
your diet as a whole still meets your overall
macronutrient, micronutrient, and fiber needs
for the day, and contains enough food volume
to keep you feeling physically satisfied.
But if you are meeting those basic needs,
so total calories are controlled and your
macros and micros and fiber are being met,
then adding those less nutrient dense foods
into the mix is going to be fine.
And then also on the flip side, trying to
manipulate your food choices in some special
way beyond that point to increase metabolism
or optimize your fat burning hormones or whatever
else people try to claim, that's only going
to have a marginal effect at best and it's
still the calorie deficit that is going to
play the biggest role by far.
If you've found the advice in this video helpful
and you want to learn exactly how to bring
this all together in terms of a fully structured
eating plan, not just the food choices, but
also the proper calorie intake, macronutrient
breakdown and the other details you need to
know to lose fat and gain muscle as effectively
as possible, make sure to take my physique
quiz over at Quiz.SeanNal.com because that'll
set you up with not just the proper nutrition
plan, but also the proper training plan that
you need based on your individual body type
goals and experience level.
You can click up here for that or you can
use the link in the description box below.
When it comes to supplementation, you can
also visit RealScienceAthletics.com to check
out my research backed, clinically dosed formulas
to help fully streamline your results and
get the very most out of your program.
The link for that is also in the description,
and as always, make sure to hit that like
button.
Leave a comment down below and subscribe if
you haven't already, in order to stay in the
loop on all of my latest content.
Thanks for watching guys and I'll see you
in the next video.