What’s going on, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video today I want to simplify
the issue of proper carbohydrate selection
for your muscle building or you fat loss diet.
I get a lot of questions all the time, where
people asked me what the best bodybuilding
carb sources are?
Whether they should eat potatoes versus rice?
Or if eating pasta is okay.
Or, if it’s okay to eat some chocolate as
part of their diet.
Ultimately, this is actually very straight
forward.
So I’m just going to break it down into
simple step-by-step terms here.
So first off, all carbohydrates no matter
where they come from are ultimately broken
down into the simplest form of glucose.
And that glucose is use to provide energy
for your muscles and your brain.
So whether you eat a bowl of rice or an apple,
or you drink a chocolate milkshake it all
ends up as basic glucose once your body has
processed it.
So in that sense, a carb is a carb because
the end product that your body is actually
uses is the same regardless of which specific
food it comes from.
Now, some people will hear that and think,
‘Well, since a carb is a carb, can I just
get my protein and fat needs for the day and
then fill up my carbohydrate macros with nothing
but cookies and ice cream and cake’.
And the reason why that’s not going to be
ideal for your bodybuilding results or for
your health is because, although all carbohydrate
are ultimately broken down into the same end
product the different foods, their package
up in are not the same in terms of their overall
nutritional value and fiber content.
So a carb is a carb, but a carb containing
food is not a carb containing food.
For example, if you ate fifty grams of carbohydrate
in a form of sweet potato you’d also be
getting vitamin A, vitamin C, some B vitamins,
some potassium, some fiber and other nutrients
as well.
Whereas if you ate fifty grams of carbohydrates
in the form of gummy bears, you’d still
be getting the actual carbs but you’d be
getting next to nothing in terms of additional
micronutrients and fiber.
And for that reason even though glucose is
glucose, you’d still want to base the bulk
of your carbohydrate intake around what would
generally be considered as clean wholefoods.
Because that’s going to make sure that you’re
meeting your nutritional needs and your fiber
needs for the day, which is going to optimize
your body composition and your training performance.
The other issue that gets brought up is the
question of absorption speed.
So some people will say that you should be
sticking to low glycemic carbs as opposed
to high glycemic carbs, or complex carbs as
opposed to simple carbs.
But for people who are otherwise healthy and
who are following a regular training program,
this really isn’t something that you need
to worry about.
The main reason for this is because the glycemic
rankings of different carbohydrates, which
is how fast they raised blood sugar levels,
those rankings are based on consuming each
carbs source alone and in a fasted state.
And it’s pretty rare, if ever, that you’ll
be eating pure carbs alone in a fasted state,
and when you already have food in your stomach
or you combine it with protein and fat, the
absorption speed of your carbs will go down
significantly.
So in terms of choosing the best bodybuilding
carbs, the practical steps are really simple.
The first step is to get around 80-90% of
your total daily carb intake from minimally
processed higher fiber sources.
These foods are going to give you the fiber,
vitamins, minerals and the vital nutrients
that you need for optimal health, muscle growth,
fat loss and overall training performance.
There are an endless number of different options
to choose from and I list a few recommendations
on the screen for you.
The second guideline is that, of that 80-90%,
try to get in at least two servings of vegetables
and one to two servings fruit per day.
If you want to eat more that’s obviously
fine.
But I wouldn’t suggest neglecting your vegetables
and fruits because they are, especially micronutrient
dense and they’re really helps to make sure
that you’re fully meeting your nutritional
needs for the day.
You can ultimately select any fruits or veggies
of your choice here.
And I would just base it on personal preference.
And ideally trying to rotate some different
sources in over the days and weeks, just so
you’re getting some good nutritional variety
and aren’t eating the exact same things
every time.
And then the last step, as long as you’re
getting that 80-90% bulk of your carbohydrate
intake from those nutritious higher fiber
sources then you can indulge a bit and fill
the remainder with whatever carbs you prefer.
So if you want to have some cookies or some
chocolate or some ice cream, whatever it is,
that’s fine.
But just make sure that it fits into your
overall totals for the day without going overboard.
Like I’d mentioned before, the issue of
fast acting carbs versus slow acting carbs
really isn’t something that you need to
worry about.
Since your fiber and your micronutrient needs
will already be met by this point, these so
called cheat foods aren’t going to negatively
affect you.
Since, in terms of actual carbs it’s all
going to be glucose in the end anyway.
So that’s really all there is to it, guys.
No need to overcomplicate it.
Just get 80-90% of your carb intake form minimally
process wholefoods, get in at least two servings
of vegetables and one to two servings of fruit
per day.
And then if you want, fill in the remaining
amount with whatever carb sources you prefer
as long as they’re being tracked as part
of your overall diet.
This type of approach will make sure that
your nutritional needs are being met, in terms
of fiber, vitamins, minerals and vital nutrients
while at the same time giving you some flexibility
to enjoy your favorite carb sources on a consistent
basis without hurting your results.
So thanks for watching, guys.
If you appreciate this science based, no BS
information when it comes to training and
nutrition, and you want to get all the tools
you need to maximize your muscle building
and your fat burning results then you can
grab my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
don’t forget to like, comment and subscribe
if you did find the information helpful.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.