Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
SeanNal.com and BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video today I want to answer the
question of whether or not protein powder
is a mandatory part of an optimal muscle building
diet plan and whether or not you need protein
powder in order to build muscle at your maximum
potential.
So a high quality protein powder is one of
the very rare few muscle building supplements
that I do stand behind and that I do recommend.
Including a protein powder in your muscle
building diet is going to help to streamline
your overall meal plan and it's going to allow
you to reach your daily protein needs in a
more convenient way.
Assuming that you're choosing whey protein,
egg protein or casein as your protein powder
source, or some combination of these, you're
also going to be receiving a very high quality
of protein with a top level absorption rate
and a very strong amino acid profile.
But do you need protein powder in order to
build muscle?
Well, although protein powder is certainly
a viable addition to your overall program
and although it is something that I do recommend
in the majority of cases, the reality is that
it most definitely is not a must have and
you absolutely can reach your full muscle
building potential without it.
The mistake that most people make here is
in thinking of protein powder as some kind
of magical substance with over the top superhero-like
muscle building effects.
Now this really just is not the case.
Yes, these powders will provide you with a
very high quality form of protein, again assuming
that you choose the right one, but in the
context of a complete diet that reaches its
total daily protein target through a combination
of other whole food sources, such as chicken,
red meat, fish, etcetera.
It's really not going to make any measurable
difference to your bottom line results whether
you include a protein powder in the mix or
not.
All forms of protein are ultimately broken
down into their individual amino acid building
blocks, and as long as you're getting roughly
0.8 to around 1 gram of protein per pound
of body weight daily from a variety of high
quality sources, you're easily going to be
receiving enough of the essential amino acids
that are needed to max out your body's muscle
building response.
Remember, just because some protein is good
does not mean that more protein must be better.
Your body can only synthesize a very limited
amount of lean tissue in any given day, and
any excess amino acids above and beyond what
can be used for building muscle in that period
are simply going to be converted and used
for energy.
Now don't get me wrong here, I definitely
do think that most serious trainees will be
better off by including a protein powder in
their diet.
All I'm saying here is that it definitely
is not mandatory, and its primary benefit
is simply a matter of convenience more than
anything else.
Most people who are busy and on the go or
perhaps who don't have a large appetite, are
going to find it much easier to consume, say,
2 to 3 whole food meals and 2 to 3 shakes
per day as opposed to 4 to 6 whole food meals.
It's much faster and easier for you to mix
up a shake containing 30 or 40 grams of protein
along with some blended carbs and fats in
liquid form as opposed to sitting down to
chicken and rice or steak and potatoes every
time you're due for a meal.
It really just comes down to you as an individual
and it depends on what type of dietary structure
allows you to stick to your meal plan in the
most effective way and also what you enjoy
the most in terms of taste.
So at the end of the day, whether or not you
decide to include a protein powder in your
diet ultimately just comes down to convenience
and taste.
No you don't need a protein powder to build
muscle at your maximum potential, but in most
cases it will make your diet a lot easier
to follow over the long run.
So thanks for watching this video lesson here
today.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
all of my future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the Description
box.
Talk to you again soon.