Hey guys,Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video lesson I want to quickly discuss cheat
meals and whether or not they are harmful
to your muscle building or fat burning results.
So is having some high sugar, high fat food
here and there going to have any negative
effect on your progress?
Well, always remember this, your body does
NOT view your diet in terms of individual
food items.
It doesn't distinguish between a piece of
fish and a potato and a cup of broccoli and
a chocolate bar.
All it really sees is your entire diet as
a whole – the total calories, the protein,
the carbs, the fats, the fiber, the micronutrients
all combined into one giant ball of chewed
up goo, essentially.
So if you’re “eating clean” the majority
of the time and then you have a slice of pizza,
it’s not as if a giant red light begins
flashing within your body and fat storage
goes into overdrive and your health and your
energy levels instantly plummet.
Proper nutrition is all about the big picture.
The key is simply moderation and tracking.
Now you’ll see different figures thrown
around here but the one that I rely on and
recommend is the 80/20 or 90/10 rule which
simply says that if 80 to 90 percent of your
diet is coming from traditional clean foods
like lean proteins and high fiber carbs and
healthy fats then the remaining 10 to 20 percent
can come from whatever foods you'd like as
long as it fits into your total daily protein,
carb and fat totals.
The 80-90% of “clean foods” will ensure
that all of your needs are being fully met
when it comes to quality protein, fiber, micronutrients
and essential fats, leaving you with 10 to
20 percent of your total daily macronutrient
intake to basically play around with however
you’d like.
For example, if your total carbohydrate intake
was set at 275 grams per day, then around
30 to 50 of those grams could be allotted
to whatever foods you’d like.
As long as your total diet remains within
your protein, carb and fat ranges then including
these “cheat” foods is not going to magically
cause you to get fat.
In fact it’s physiologically impossible.
And this applies whether your goal is to build
muscle or to burn fat and this is why I hate
the term “cheat meal” or “cheat foods”
to begin with, because it implies that you’re
doing something that's wrong or outside of
the rules, which obviously, you're not.
I mean, having a slice of pizza or a bowl
of ice cream here and there is not going to
negatively affect your results, nor does it
make you inferior in some way to the people
who eat nothing but boiled chicken breast
and spinach all day.
Now if you really have no desire at all to
indulge in these types of foods in moderation,
then that’s totally fine.
But if you would be interested in getting
into really good shape while still being able
to eat in a flexible, more open way then just
know that it’s perfectly fine to do so.
Just remember that this is not a free ticket
to start stuffing your face with donuts and
Twinkies.
The “flexible foods” that you include
still need to reasonably fit into your overall
diet as a whole in terms of the total calories
and the protein and carbs and fats.
And that’s the whole point here: as long
as it fits the totals then you have nothing
to worry about.
However, if you take this advice too far and
it does push your total calorie intake into
an excess of say, 200 calories a day, then
yes, you WILL gain fat, or you'll slow down
your progress if you’re in a fat loss phase.
Again, tracking and moderation are the name
of the game here.
If you have a reasonably good idea of what
your daily macronutrient needs are and how
your “flexible foods” are fitting into
the totals then just follow the 80/20 or 90/10
rule and you’ll be good to go.
So thanks alot for watching this video.
If you found the information useful here today
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date.
Also make sure to check out my fully structured
step-by-step muscle building and fat loss
programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.