Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And in this video lesson, I want to talk a
little bit about the topic of cardio timing,
specifically what the best time of day is
to perform cardio in order to maximize fat
loss. Now, you'll generally hear two main
recommendations for this. Some will say that,
the best time to do cardio is first thing
in the morning on an empty stomach, while
others will tell you to do it immediately
after your weight training workout. Here's
why both of these recommendations are ultimately
misguided. So, cardio timing myth number one
is to perform it first thing in the morning
on an empty stomach. And the logic here is
that, because there's no food in your stomach
and glycogen levels are low, the body will
be forced to utilize more body fat for energy
during the session. Now, I already covered
this detail in a previous video, but here
are four major reasons why morning cardio
on an empty stomach does not help you burn
fat at a faster rate. So, reason number one,
fasted cardio increases lipolysis, which is
the amount of fat that is broken down, but
does not increase fat oxidation, which is
actually the amount of fat that is burned.
In the end, the fatty acids that aren't used
for energy are simply re-stored. Secondly,
a pre-cardio meal increases Excess Post Exercise
Oxygen Consumption, by increasing thermogenesis,
which is the number of calories that are burned
as heat. Thirdly, for most people, performing
cardio in a completely fasted state decreases
overall training intensity which in turn reduces
calorie expenditure. And the final reason
is that fasted cardio results in a greater
degree of muscle loss. Cardio timing myth
number two is to perform it immediately after
your weight training workout. And again, the
idea here is that because the body's glycogen
levels will be depleted as a result of your
workout, more body fat will be used for fuel
during the cardio session. In reality, glycogen
levels are not depleted to any significant
degree as a result of weight training. A highly
exhaustive weight training session will drain
glycogen by about 30%, with most average workouts
using up far less than that. Even then, the
idea that performing cardio with low glycogen
levels will increase fat loss is unfounded
to begin with. Your body is an incredibly
complex and intricate machine. And its specific
use of fuel during exercise is affected by
a very lengthy list of factors, most of which
are completely beyond your control. So, trying
to manipulate the type of fuel that your body
uses during cardio, whether it would be carbs
or fat is honestly something you shouldn't
even be worrying about. For example, high
intensity, low duration cardio is research
proven to cause greater long term fat loss
than low intensity, long duration cardio,
even though it primarily burns carbohydrates
for fuel during the session. So, when is the
best time to do your cardio then? Well, the
short and simple answer is to perform your
cardio when, A, if it's most conveniently
into your schedule. And B, when you feel the
most motivated and can generate the greatest
amount of overall intensity. And it's really
all just a matter of personal preference here.
The only time I would recommend that you avoid doing
cardio is going to be immediately pre-workout.
Weight training should always be treated as
your number one priority in your overall workout
plan. And you definitely don't want to enter
into your weight training session already
pre-fatigued from a cardio workout. Aside
from that, the best time you do cardio is
whenever it works best for you. So, thanks
for watching. If you did find the information
in this video lesson useful, please make sure
to leave a comment, like and subscribe to
stay up-to-date on all of our future videos.
Also don't forget to join the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night. And don't
forget to download your free 28-day mass building
plan, which includes a free workout, meal
plan and supplement guide, over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link to which is in the description box
below. So, thanks again for watching. And
I'll talk to you again soon.