What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransormationTruth.com
with a Q&A video today.
And the question is: are squats necessary
for building big legs?
Now, I know that for whatever reason this
can end up being, sort of a sensitive subjects
where someone tries to say that squats aren’t
an exercise that you must do, then some people
will get kind of defensive on it, probably
because squats are a very traditional bodybuilding
exercise and they’re sort of treated as
a symbol of hardcore lifting, so there’s
a lot of emotional attachment to it.
So I’m sure this video will get some auto
dislikes no matter what reasons I give here,
but the fact is that it is perfectly possible
to build a strong muscular, impressive lower
body without specifically performing barbell
squats.
There’s no direct physiological reason for
why a squatting movement is specifically required
in order to add significant muscle to your
lower body.
Now don’t get me wrong, squats are an extremely
effective leg exercise and I do recommend
that you include them in your leg routine
if you’re physically able to.
And I would say that overall for most people
a basic barbell squat is probably going to
be the most productive lower body exercise
you can do.
So, yes, if your goal is to maximize your
size and strength gains in your lower body,
then you should perform squats if you can.
However, that doesn’t mean that squats are
some kind of magical exercise that you absolutely
must perform and it doesn’t mean that you
can’t still get great result without them.
So maybe you have an injury that makes it
difficult for you to squat safely.
Maybe you don’t have access to a squat rack.
Or maybe you just don’t identify as a bodybuilder
and you don’t even want to maximize the
size of your quads and glutes, and you’d
rather perform other exercises just out of
preference.
Not everybody has the same training goals
and just because the guy next to you at the
gym is working to achieve four hundred and
five pound squats or build twenty-eight inch
thighs, that doesn’t mean that you have
to be doing the same thing.
Everybody is different and everybody is in
the gym for their own reasons.
But in any case, if you’ve decided to remove
squats from your routine for whatever reason,
then no, it’s not the end of the world for
your leg training by any means.
At the end of the day achieving hypertrophy
ultimately just comes down to placing a given
muscle under tension using a particular exercise
and then progressively overloading that movement
with enough volume and frequency.
And as long as you’re able to accomplish
that then you will gain muscle.
And basic squats are one of the best movements
when it comes to achieving that, but it doesn’t
mean that there aren’t plenty other effective
options as well.
You’ve got leg presses, either forty-five
degree or seated.
You could do one-legged leg presses, barbell
or dumbbell lunges, barbell or dumbbell step-ups,
these are all perfectly acceptable ways for
hitting your quads as long as you’re using
good technique and increasing the workload
overtime.
And in some cases for people with certain
body structures that aren’t ideal for squatting,
like those with really long femurs, other
exercise like leg presses can actually be
superior to squats, believe it or not.
And if it’s specifically barbell squats
that you can’t perform then there are ton
of other squatting variations that you can
use there as well.
I wrote some of them down here so I don’t
forget, but you’ve got front squats, split
squats, single leg squats, hack squats, dumbbell
squats, various types of machine squats, these
are just a few examples.
And there’s actually research out there
now which I’ll put in the description box
below, showing that spilt squats are actually
just as effective as barbell squats when it
comes to lower body training.
So, bottom line here guys, squats are an awesome
leg exercise; I’m not talking down on squats
here, and I would encourage you to perform
them if you’re trying to maximize your gains
and you can do them safely.
But are squats necessary to make great gains?
I would say no, they’re not.
Your quads can still be hit effectively using
a wide variety of other movements.
Whether you go with a leg press and a lunge,
or split squats and a one-legged leg press,
or a front squats and a dumbbell step-up,
there are lots of different ways to do an
effective quad workout without specifically
doing a barbell back squat.
Your hamstrings are going to be best hit with
direct knee flexion and hip extension exercises
anyway.
So things like leg curls and Romanian deadlifts
and if you want to specifically target your
glutes then hip thrust will do a better job
than squats anyway or at least as good as
a job.
So, that’s all I want to say on that.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this was helpful.
Make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe if it was.
If you want to grab my complete step-by-step
Body Transformation Blueprint that gives you
all the tools you need to gain muscle and
loose fat as effectively as possible; the
workouts, the meal plans, the supplement guides
along with one-on-one coaching then you can
click here or you can head over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on facebook, Instagram
and SnapChat here if you aren’t already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.