For those of you who have been following this
channel for a while, you might know that approximately
13 months ago, I created a video on whether
stretching in between sets could enhance muscle
hypertrophy.
In the video, we explored a study by Evangelista
et al. that essentially found in previously
untrained men, performing 30 seconds of pain-free
static stretching between sets for the main
muscle in an exercise resulted in greater
increases in muscle thickness measurements.
At the time that video was published, that
was the only single published study examining
stretching in between sets.
Since then, 2 new studies have come out adding
to the literature on stretching in between
sets and hypertrophy.
One study by Nakamura et al. examined the
outcomes of static stretching between sets
in previously untrained men, while the second
study by Wadhi et al. assessed the outcomes
of weighted stretching between sets in trained
men.
Let us first overview the study by Nakamura
et al.
16 untrained men had one leg assigned to a
stretching condition and their other leg to
a traditional condition.
They trained the bilateral squat with an inertial
flywheel for 3 sets of 10 repetitions, using
3 minutes of rest between sets, twice per
week for 5 weeks.
For those unaware, an inertial flywheel actually
overloads the lowering (termed eccentric)
phase of the movement.
With the leg assigned to the stretching condition,
during the 3-minute rest interval between
sets, they stretched the quadriceps for 30
seconds, rested for 30 seconds, stretched
the quadriceps for a further 30 seconds, and
then rested for the remaining 90 seconds before
commencing the next set.
With the leg assigned to the traditional condition,
it performed no stretching and rested for
the 3-minute rest intervals between sets.
Before and after the study, muscle thickness
of the vastus lateralis, vastus medialis,
rectus femoris, lateral region of the vastus
intermedius, and medial region of the vastus
intermedius were each measured at an upper
and lower region.
Furthermore, thickness of the hamstrings and
gluteus maximus was each measured at a single
region.
The researchers found that for all regions
and muscles measured, changes in thickness
were statistically similar between the stretching
and traditional condition, indicating that
stretching in between sets may not enhance
muscle hypertrophy.
As a result, this study does not agree with
the original findings by Evangelista et al.
Let us progress to overviewing the second
study by Wadhi et al.
26 men with an average of 3 years of training
experience were allocated into a stretching
or traditional group.
Both groups trained twice per week for 8 weeks.
Each session, the flat bench press and incline
bench press were trained.
Throughout the 8 weeks of training, they progressed
from performing 3 sets per exercise to performing
5 sets.
On training day one of each week, they aimed
to perform 4-6 repetitions that were approximately
2 repetitions away from failure each set.
Although the final set on the incline bench
press was executed to failure.
On training day two of each week, they aimed
to perform 8-10 repetitions approximately
2 repetitions away from failure each set.
Although, again, the final set on the incline
bench press was executed to failure.
When necessary, the load was adjusted on each
set and over sessions to ensure subjects continued
to train within the prescribed repetition
ranges, and at the same proximity from failure.
The traditional group rested passively for
2 minutes between their sets in a session.
The stretching group similarly rested for
2 minutes between sets in a session.
However, for the first 30 seconds of this
rest interval, they performed a loaded chest
stretch on a cable machine, using approximately
15% of the load they just used on the prior
set.
Also, subjects were instructed not to produce
any active tension from the chest, rather
let the chest be maximally be stretched by
the load.
Before and after the study, thickness of the
pectoralis major at the belly, and at a lateral
portion, was measured.
What the researchers found was that increases
at both regions of the pectoralis major were
statistically similar between the stretching
and traditional groups, suggesting weighted
stretching between sets may not enhance muscle
hypertrophy.
So, combining these two new studies with the
Evangelista study, and it now seems the ever
so slight majority of the evidence indicates
that stretching in between sets might not
help you build more muscle.
Having said this, there still are some important
considerations.
These three studies, although generally looking
at the effectiveness of stretching in between
sets, are quite different from one another.
The Wadhi study examined weighted stretching
in between sets in trained men, whereas the
other two papers by Nakamura and Evangelista
examined unload static stretching between
sets in previously untrained men.
Furthermore, if we more directly compared
the Nakamura and Evangelista studies, which
have conflicting results, there are some potentially
noteworthy differences.
Firstly, the Nakamura study used an inertial
flywheel squat exercise, which as we've noted
applies eccentric overload, whereas the Evangelista
study used typical free weight and machine
exercises, like the leg extension.
Could these different exercise modalities
somehow explain the conflicting results?
Secondly, in the Evangelista study, in which
stretching was found to benefit muscle hypertrophy,
they had subjects stretch for 30 seconds during
the rest intervals.
Contrastingly, the Nakamura study had subjects
stretch for 2 bouts of 30 seconds during each
rest interval, totaling 60 seconds of static
stretching in between sets.
The reason this could matter is that longer
duration static stretching appears to reduce
muscle force production, and this could negatively
influence the hypertrophic stimulus.
For example, Siatras et al. found that stretching
the quadriceps for 60 seconds resulted in
greater decreases in quadriceps force output
versus stretching for 30 seconds.
As a result, perhaps the reason the Nakamura
study failed to find a benefit to static stretching
in between sets was that subjects stretched
for a total of 60 seconds between sets.
Perhaps a 30-second stretch instead, as used
in the Evangelista study, is the ideal duration
to induce enhancements in muscle growth.
However, it's worth remembering that the Wadhi
study, in which weighted stretching was employed,
did use a 30-second stretching duration between
sets, yet found no benefits for hypertrophy.
All in all, it's clear to see that future
research will still be of great benefit for
trying to tease out the details on if and
how stretching in between sets could enhance
muscle growth.
Now, it's potentially worth discussing the
fact that all the current three studies that
have examined stretching in between sets have
measured muscle growth via muscle thickness.
Muscle thickness only measures one dimension
of the whole muscle.
How would the results of these studies look
if they used an alternative muscle growth
measurement?
What if researchers measured cross-sectional
area, (which measured two dimensions), volume
(which measures three dimensions), or even
something like fascicle length.
I think the fascicle length measurement is
an interesting one.
As we've described in a previous video, an
increase in fascicle length likely reflects
an increase in the length of muscle fibers,
as muscle fibers are within fascicles.
As we saw in that video, it appears stretching
stimuli can induce increases in muscle fiber
length.
Furthermore, although not a unanimous finding
in the research, some human evidence indicates
intense static stretching protocols produce
increases in fascicle length (which presumably
reflects an increase in muscle fiber length).
This brings up the interesting question, could
stretching in between sets be a tool to help
increase muscle fiber length?
Hopefully, future research can examine this.
-
As a final section for this video, viewers
may be interested in how stretching in between
sets impacts strength adaptations.
Many people would think, and justifiably so,
that given static stretching can decrease
the force output of a muscle, stretching in
between sets would reduce the strength adaptations
you experience.
However, the long-term research does not appear
to strongly support this.
In the Evangelista study, they found similar
increases in bench press and leg extension
one-rep max between the group that stretched
pain-free for 30 seconds between sets and
the group that rested passively.
In the Nakamura study, they decided to look
at one-rep max on the leg press, peak concentric,
eccentric, and isometric torque on a leg extension
dynamometer.
Except for isometric torque, increases in
these strength measures were statistically
similar between the stretching and traditional
conditions.
Intriguingly, the isometric torque increases
were greater for the stretching condition.
Finally, in the Wadhi study, increases in
bench press one-rep max were similar between
the group that weighted stretched between
sets and the group that rested passively.
Therefore, the majority of the current data
indicate stretching in between sets might
not deleteriously influence strength adaptations,
at least within the confines of the protocols
used in the respective studies.
To conclude the video, since the publication
of the study by Evangelista, suggesting stretching
in between sets could enhance muscle growth,
two new studies now indicate stretching in
between sets may not help build more muscle.
However, these three studies are fairly heterogeneous,
meaning that future research will be of great
value for teasing out if and how stretching
in between sets could actually enhance muscle
hypertrophy.
I am aware of at least one study currently
being conducted examining the outcomes weighted
stretching in between sets.
According to the author, it should be published
by the end of 2021.
So, hopefully, I'll be creating an updated
version of this video in the future.
Thank you for watching.
As always, I hope you found the video helpful
or informative in some way.