Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and today
I want to address a very common excuse that
people give to me about why they can't gain
muscle or lose fat and that is that they don't
have enough time to work out.
So, yes, most of us really do have a lot going
on in our day to day lives, and juggling things
like work and school and family and social
life along with a complete workout plan can
require some real focus and discipline.
But that’s all this really comes down to.
It comes down to focus and discipline.
Now I have no doubt that you probably are
leading a very busy life and that you truly
believe that it’s not possible for you to
carry out an effective workout plan with your
current situation, however, I’m here to
tell you that in 99% of cases, this just flat-out
is not true.
For example, can you honestly say that you
can’t spare just one hour of your time 3
days per week to hit the gym?
Yes, a higher frequency training plan might
produce slightly faster overall results, but
there’s no question at all that a 3 day
per week workout schedule can and will produce
significant, ongoing gains in muscle size
and strength.
And if your primary goal is fat loss and you
aren’t even trying to gain muscle, then
there’s absolutely no question at all that
this will work very well for you.
Just go with Legs on Day 1, Chest/Shoulders/Triceps
on Day 2, Back/Biceps on Day 3 or, just do
an Upper Body/Lower Body split and alternate
back and forth between the two workouts.
If you think that you can't get it done because
your entire day is jam-packed all the way
from the moment that you wake up until the
moment that you go to sleep then just go to
bed an hour earlier and wake up an hour earlier.
Cut out an hour of TV time.
Spend less time on Facebook and YouTube.
Go on your lunch break or, or in between classes
at school.
If you actually sat down and you honestly
examined how you spend every waking hour of
your time throughout the day, you’d likely
be appalled at how much time you waste on
ultimately trivial things that could be eliminated
and replaced with more meaningful activities
and I know that I was appalled when I really
sat down and did this myself several months
ago.
And my overall productivity has skyrocketed
as a result.
So, okay, let’s assume there’s a gun to
your head and you still can’t get into the
gym 3 days per week.
Well just do 2 days a week then.
Remember, any training plan that allows you
to put forth a good hard effort and get stronger
on all of the major compound exercises from
week to week is still going to produce noteworthy
results, and a 2 day a week workout plan can
certainly accomplish that.
Just train upper body on Day 1 and lower body
on Day 2 or just do a basic full body workout
twice a week.
Even in the absolute extreme, highly unlikely
case that 1 single workout per week is all
you could muster, even this could still do
the trick with the proper intensity and workout
structure.
If you can’t make it to the gym because
the travel time is too far then just get a
home gym setup.
Get a barbell, adjustable dumbbells, a chin-up
bar and a squat rack.
If you can’t afford all those pieces of
equipment or if you don’t have enough space
then just get the barbell and the dumbbells.
That will be enough.
If that's still too much just get the dumbbells
only.
And by the way, all of the advice I'm giving
here assumes that you’re a serious trainee
who is looking to maximize their lean muscle
gains or their fat loss and get into the very
best shape possible.
If you’re just someone who wants to be more
active, gain a bit of muscle, lose a bit of
fat, and increase their overall health and
fitness, then some adjustable dumbbells in
combination with basic body weight exercises
will easily be enough for you.
Now what about cardio?
Maybe you’ve realized by now that you really
can execute 2 or 3 basic resistance training
workouts per week either at the gym or from
home, but you also want to throw in a few
cardio sessions per week as well.
Well, traditional 40-60 minute slow-pace cardio
is one option, but even I’ll admit that
that can become tedious and time-consuming
on top of regular weight training.
Well the solution here is also pretty simple.
Increase the intensity and lower the duration
by performing a couple of high intensity interval
sessions each week.
These types of workouts don’t need to last
any longer than about 15 minutes, and at higher
levels of intensity they can be as short as
7 or 8 minutes.
Not only are H.I.I.T cardio workouts much
shorter and more efficient, but they actually
burn more total fat in comparison to longer
duration/lower intensity cardio as well.
Now I can't possibly imagine that you don’t
have the time to squeeze in 15-30 minutes
of total cardio at some point throughout the
week.
And if you want to be even more efficient,
you can just kill two birds by adding the
cardio sessions onto the end of your weight
training workouts.
You don’t even need any gym equipment for
this either.
You can go outside and run, or if you want
you could stay right in your living room and
just do body weight intervals instead.
So as you can see, there’s really no excuse
here.
If you’re truly serious about getting into
better shape, there’s always a way to make
it work if you really want it.
For example, 2 weight training workouts per
week along with 2 high intensity cardio sessions
per week is a completely reasonable plan to
get you into very impressive shape and it
would only take up around 2.5 hours total
of the 170 hours or so you have available
every week.
And in addition to all of this, don’t forget
that the training aspect of your fitness program
is by no means the be-all-end-all, and that
a huge portion of your results are simply
going to come down to your eating habits and
if your goal is fat loss then the majority
of your, of your results are going to be attributed
to your diet.
And you can’t tell me that you don’t have
time for that because you’re already eating
multiple meals throughout the day - it’s
really just a matter of making better overall
food choices and employing a bit of planning
and preparation.
And also don't forget this.
Regular training and healthy eating is actually
going to end up giving you more energy and
it's going to put you into a clearer, more
focused head space and that's going to then
carry over and positively impact all the other
aspects of your life as well.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you found the information useful here today
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
I'll link that in the description box as well.
Talk to you again soon.