When it comes to maximizing muscle growth,
it's far from uncommon to hear that time under
tension is an important component.
Time under tension refers to the duration
you place a muscle under strain.
Typically, it's represented as the duration
of a set for an exercise.
For instance, performing 10 reps on the biceps
curl with each rep consisting of a 2-second
lifting phase and a 2-second lowering phase
results in a total time under tension of 40
seconds.
It's often claimed a longer time under tension
maximizes hypertrophy.
It's thought longer durations place the muscle
under more strain, resulting in a more powerful
stimulus for hypertrophy.
For example, numerous sources claim around
30-60 seconds of time under tension per set
is optimal for building muscle.
In this video, with help from scientific research,
we'll critically assess these claims.
Indeed, some evidence indicates a longer time
under tension may enhance muscle growth, but
the details are important.
Usui et al. divided 16 untrained young men
into a slow or normal speed group.
Both groups trained the back squat to around
90 degrees of knee flexion for 3 sets of 10
reps with a 50% one-rep max load, three times
per week for 10 weeks.
The slow speed group performed each rep with
a 3-second lowering phase and a 3-second lifting
phase.
The normal speed group performed each rep
with a 1-second lowering phase and a 1-second
lifting phase.
Thickness of the rectus femoris and vastus
intermedius was measured at 30, 50, and 70%
of the thigh length, while thickness of the
vastus lateralis and vastus medialis was measured
at 50% of the thigh length.
The normal speed group experienced virtually
no growth at all measured areas, while the
slow speed group experienced significant increases
at 70% of the thigh length of the rectus femoris
as well as 50 and 70% of the thigh length
for the vastus intermedius.
Taken at face value, this study indicates
slower repetition speeds result in greater
muscle growth.
However, there is a noteworthy limitation
with this study.
Both groups performed 3 sets of 10 reps with
a 50% one-rep max load on the back squat each
session.
The slow speed group would have actually been
training closer to failure.
Failure is defined as the point at which you
cannot perform any more repetitions with a
given load.
This is because, with a given load, slower
rep speeds mean you perform fewer reps.
You can imagine this for yourself.
When keeping load and repetition number constant,
using slow rep speeds would be more fatiguing
compared to faster rep speeds.
As a result, we don't know if the greater
muscle growth observed for the slow speed
group was actually because of the longer time
under tension or because they were training
closer to failure.
As far as I'm aware, there are only two other
studies in the research supporting the idea
slower repetition tempos produce greater increases
in measures of muscle growth.
But both of these studies share the same limitation
in that the slower repetition conditions were
training closer to failure.
Watanabe et al. had a group of untrained men
perform 3 sets of 8 reps with a 50% one-rep
max load on the knee extension and leg curl,
twice per week for 12 weeks.
A slow speed group performed each exercise
with a 3-second lowering and 3-second lifting
phase, while a normal speed group used a 1-second
lowering and 1-second lifting phase.
Increases in quadriceps and hamstring thickness
were significantly greater for the slow speed
group.
However, all subjects trained with 3 sets
of 8 reps with a 50% one-rep max load.
Consequently, the slow speed group was training
closer to failure.
A second study by Watanabe et al. had untrained
men train the knee extension for 3 sets of
12 reps with a 30% one-rep max load, twice
per week for 12 weeks.
A slow speed group performed the exercise
with a 3-second lowering and 3-second lifting
phase, while a normal speed group used a 1-second
lowering and 1-second lifting phase.
Increases in quadriceps cross-sectional area
favored the slow speed group.
Both groups trained with 3 sets of 12 reps
with a 30% one-rep max load, again meaning
the slow speed group would have been training
closer to failure.
Collectively, although in these three studies,
the slow speed groups experienced greater
muscle growth, we cannot be certain the greater
growth was because they trained with a longer
time under tension or because they trained
closer to failure.
The only way we can know is to look at studies
that not only had groups use different repetition
speeds, but also had subjects perform their
repetitions to failure.
Let us evaluate a recent study by Lacerda
et al., which I believe to be the best study
to date exploring if a longer time under tension
enhances muscle growth.
10 untrained men had one leg assigned to a
2-second condition, and their other leg assigned
to a 6-second condition.
Both legs trained the unilateral knee extension
for 3-4 sets to failure with a 50-60% one-rep
max load, 2-3 times per week for 14 weeks.
The leg assigned to the 2-second condition
performed the exercise with a 1-second lifting
phase and a 1-second lowering phase.
The 6-second condition leg performed the exercise
with a 3-second lifting phase and a 3-second
lowering phase.
I should emphasize again that both conditions
involved performing repetitions to failure
with their respective repetition speed.
On average, the 6-second condition involved
a time under tension of between 37 to 52 seconds,
whereas the 2-second condition involved a
time under tension between 25 and 38 seconds,
so some of their sets were performed under
the 30-second threshold which numerous sources
recommend.
However, both conditions produced similar
increases in rectus femoris and vastus lateralis
cross-sectional area.
Therefore, when repetitions are performed
to failure, a longer time under tension does
not appear to enhance muscle growth.
Another recent study by Chavez et al. supports
these findings.
Untrained men performed the unilateral knee
extension for 3 sets to failure with a 70%
one-rep max, twice per week for 8 weeks.
Some subjects trained one leg with a 2-second
lifting and 2-second lowering phase, called
the 4-second condition, and their other leg
with a self-selected repetition speed.
On average, subjects performed a 0.9-second
lifting and 0.9-second lowering phase with
this leg.
Again, I should emphasize both conditions
involved performing repetitions to failure.
However, increases in vastus lateralis cross-sectional
area were similar between both conditions.
Now, these are not the only two studies assessing
the impacts of different time under tension
durations on direct measures of muscle growth
when subjects carry out their repetitions
to failure.
A meta-analysis by Schoenfeld et al. sums
up the other studies.
For those unaware, meta-analyses are studies
that combine the results of numerous individual
studies looking at the same topic.
Combining the results of 4 studies, increases
in measures of muscle growth were similar
between fast and medium repetition speeds.
In this analysis, fast rep speeds were classified
at repetitions that lasted between 0.5 to
4 seconds, whereas medium rep speeds were
repetitions that lasted between 4 and 8 seconds.
Therefore, this analysis indicates that provided
repetitions are performed to failure, there
is no difference in muscle growth between
performing reps with a 0.5-second duration
or 8-second duration.
Interestingly, there is a study not included
in this analysis suggesting that super slow
rep speeds may actually be inferior for building
muscle.
Schuenke et al. had untrained women perform
the leg press, squat, and knee extension for
3 sets, 2-3 times per week for 6 weeks.
Some subjects performed each exercise to failure
with a 1-2 second lifting phase and a 1-2
second lower phase using an 80-85% one-rep
max load.
This was the traditional strength group.
Other subjects performed each exercise to
failure with a 10-second lifting phase and
a 4-second lowering phase using a 40-60% one-rep
max load.
This was the super slow group.
Increases in vastus lateralis slow-twitch
and fast-twitch fiber cross-sectional area
were significantly greater for the traditional
strength group compared to the super slow
group.
Now, this is only one study, so I believe
we cannot be truly confident repetition tempos
longer than 10 seconds are suboptimal.
More research is needed.
So, when overviewing the current evidence,
it appears repetition durations lasting from
0.5 seconds up to 8 seconds produce comparable
muscle growth, opposing the notion a longer
time under tension enhances growth.
Now, all of these studies were conducted on
untrained subjects.
That includes the 4 studies in the Schoenfeld
et al. meta-analysis.
One might argue that in trained individuals,
a longer time under tension would enhance
muscle growth.
To my knowledge, there aren't any papers with
trained subjects in this area unfortunately.
However, physiologically, I believe it seems
unlikely a longer time under tension would
enhance muscle growth, provided repetitions
are performed to or very close to failure.
I say this because, irrespective of repetition
speed, mechanical tension would likely be
adequately high provided repetitions are carried
out near failure.
Mechanical tension is currently the best-categorized
mechanism of muscle growth.
Mechanical tension is equal to the force produced
by a muscle.
One key component of how much force a muscle
produces is the number of muscle fibers recruited.
In a very general sense, muscles consist of
slow-twitch fibers and fast-twitch fibers.
Slow-twitch fibers are highly resistant to
fatigue but produce low amounts of power,
whereas fast-twitch fibers are less fatigue
resistant but produce high amounts of power.
Generally, when force requirements are low,
slow-twitch muscle fibers are recruited, but
as force requirements increase, faster-twitch
muscle fibers are recruited.
High levels of muscle fiber recruitment, so
high levels of slow-twitch and fast-twitch
fiber recruitment, is one important component
for inducing muscle growth.
Regardless of time under tension, performing
repetitions to or very close to failure likely
results in sufficiently high levels of muscle
fiber recruitment.
A study by Morton et al. demonstrates this.
A group of men with at least 2 years of training
experience performed the leg extension for
3 sets with 4 different conditions.
One condition involved performing repetitions
to failure with an 80% one-rep load using
a 1-second lifting, 1-second pause, and 1-second
lowering phase.
On average, the time under tension for this
condition was 26 seconds per set.
The second condition involved performing repetitions
to failure with an 80% one-rep max load too,
but using a 3-second lifting, 1-second pause,
and 3-second lowering phase.
On average, the time under tension for this
condition was 31 seconds per set.
The third condition involved performing repetitions
to failure with a 30% one-rep max load using
a 1-second lifting, 1-second pause, and 1-second
lowering phase.
On average, the time under tension for this
condition was 54 seconds per set.
The fourth condition involved performing repetitions
to failure with a 30% one-rep max load using
a 3-second lifting, 1-second pause, and 3-second
lowering phase.
On average, the time under tension for this
condition was 76 seconds per set.
The researchers found that all four conditions
resulted in similar recruitment of slow-twitch
and fast-twitch fibers from the vastus lateralis.
Note, recruitment was measured via glycogen
depletion of the fibers.
Put differently, regardless of load or repetition
speed, overall muscle fiber recruitment was
likely similar.
This supports the idea that provided repetitions
are carried out near to failure, mechanical
tension is likely sufficiently high regardless
of the repetition tempo used.
The research on rep ranges provides further
evidence that a longer time under tension
does enhance muscle growth.
Two meta-analyses indicate that reps between
5 and 35 produce similar muscle growth, again,
provided those reps are performed to or very
close to failure.
This includes research done on trained subjects.
For instance, Morton et al. found that in
men with at least 2 years of training experience,
there was no difference in vastus lateralis
fast-twitch and slow-twitch fiber growth after
training the leg press and knee extension
with either 8-12 reps to failure or 20-25
reps to failure.
Of course, performing 20-25 reps means you
experience a longer time under tension versus
performing 8-12 reps, yet this did not matter.
Finally, I should mention that theoretically,
there may be a minimal time under tension
threshold per set required for optimal hypertrophy.
For instance, we've detailed in a previous
video that one-rep max training does not produce
muscle growth.
Therefore, accumulating some reps and consequently
some time under tension is likely needed to
elicit optimal adaptations.
As we've mentioned already, reps between 5
and 35 are likely similarly effective for
muscle growth, when reps are carried out to
or near failure.
Therefore, the time under tension accumulated
with 5 normal speed reps may be the minimal
time under the tension threshold per set.
Although, as we've discussed in a previous
video, reps as low as 3 could build muscle
effectively, so the threshold could be even
lower.
Ultimately, it would be interesting to see
more research evaluating the minimal time
under tension threshold for muscle growth per set.
In conclusion, I believe there is sufficient
evidence to suggest that a longer time under
tension does not enhance muscle growth.
Furthermore, the numerous recommendations
that sets should last from 30-60 seconds are
not substantiated.
However, this should not be misinterpreted
to say that using a longer time under tension
is useless.
Slowing your repetition speeds could be a
way of applying progressive overload.
For instance, in one session you may perform
3 sets of 8 reps with 20kg on an exercise
using a 2-second lifting and 2-second lowering
phase.
Next session, you may use the same load, reps,
and sets but use a 3-second lifting and 3-second
lowering phase.
Additionally, using a variety of repetition
speeds in your training program could potentially
be one effective way of ensuring more balanced
growth across a muscle, as there is some evidence
that different repetition tempos produce different
regional muscle growth.
We've covered the research on this in a previous
video.