Hey what’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
Sorry I didn’t post any videos last week.
I actually been travelling to Thailand for
most of January and with the jetlag and then
being sick, and getting and a few other things
popping out, I’m actually heading over to
Montreal, got back I a couple of weeks here
to live for probably at least a few months
and with planning all of that out, it’s
been a little hard getting back on track but
everything’s good now and I’ll be back
on track this week with regular videos and
today I wanted to address a really common
mistake that a lot of lifters make, which
is changing their workouts way too often rather
than committing to a set routine and focusing
on progressing on that routine as much as
possible before going ahead to switching this
up.
So we’ve all hear about this concept of
muscle confusion and a lot of lifters are
under the impression that they need to be
constantly switching things up in their workouts,
like their exercise selection, their rep ranges,
rest periods, etcetera, otherwise their body
will get used to the same stimulus and they’ll
stop gaining muscle size and strength.
Now, actually the truth on this is that constantly
changing up your workouts every week or every
couple of weeks, this is actually a really
big mistake, especially if you’re a beginner
and the main reason for that is because, if
you’re always performing different exercises
with different rep ranges and the rest periods
then it becomes really difficult to properly
measured your progress from workout to workout.
If one week for chest you’re doing, let’s
say a flat dumbbell press and an incline hammer
press, and then a cable cross over, and in
the next week you’re doing an incline barbell
press, a decline dumbbell press and a machine
fly, and in the next week something different
and you’re using varied rep ranges and things
like that, you’re really don’t have anything
concrete to measure your progress against
from workout to workout, and you’ll probably
just end up aimlessly bouncing around and
not really progressing nearly as efficiently
as you could.
So the entire basis of gaining muscle is to
achieve progressive overload by adding more
weight to the bar and your exercises overtime,
so you’ll be far better off to follow a
set workout plan with a set sequence of exercises
and then just put all of your focus on getting
as strong as possible on those particular
lifts.
As long as you’re coming back to the gym
stronger from week to week then there’s
really no need to change your program because
the fact that you’re consistently making
those strength gains, that means you’re
programs is working.
That’s exactly what you want to be aiming
for.
So to be getting consistently stronger on
a set of key lifts and to just randomly change
things up, that really doesn’t make any
sense to do that.
At the end of the day as long as you’re
training with sufficient intensity, you’re
resting adequately in-between sessions and
your nutrition is on point and you’re making
a consistent effort to add more weight and
more reps by keeping your training in your
log book, then you should be able to make
progress on the same routine and on the same
set of lifts for a pretty long time before
there’s any need to change anything at all,
especially if you’re a beginner.
If you’re a beginner then you can make a
linear progress on the same routine for a
very long time as long as your diet is on
point without needing to make any changes.
The whole concept of muscle confusion or the
idea that you need to always keep shocking
your muscles into growth, that’s just completely
overblown and it’s directly counter-productive
in a lot of cases.
Now, I’m obviously not saying that you should
never change your workout, I’m just saying
to at least have a set that you’re sticking
to, progressing on and to follow it for a
consistent base of training.
You can either continue with the same routine
until your strength gains plateau or until
you’ve been following it for long enough
that you’ve made some significant strength
gains and you just want to change things up
for a variety.
For example; as you moved through different
phases of training experience from being a
complete beginner to intermediate, to more
advanced then different routines might be
more appropriate.
So that might mean going from, say a full
body routine to an upper-lower split, or an
upper-lower split to a legs push-pull split,
that’s just one example.
You might want to change your workouts to
focus on a different set of exercises so that
you can emphasize certain muscle groups or
movements pattern after you’ve been using
the same sequence of lifts for a while.
If you’re an advance lifter than you might
want to incorporates some specialization training
to bring up aligning muscle group or you might
want to change things up purely for the sake
of mental variety to keep your workouts fun
and interesting.
There are a lot of possible reasons why you
might want to switch form one type of routine
to another during different periods of training
but the bottom line is that you don’t need
to change your workout nearly as often as
you might think, and you most definitely don’t
want to be constantly switching things up
every single workout or every few weeks.
Get yourself on to a set routine that’s
appropriate for your goals, stick with that
routine and make as much progress on it as
you possibly can, and if your progress starts
to slow down or if you want to move to a different
workout or a different--sorry--a different
workout split or a different style of training
then you can change things up, but constantly
varying your training too often is not only
unnecessary but it’s going to be counter-productive
in a lot of situations.
So I hope you found this helpful.
If you want to get access to my recommended
sequence of routines for beginners, intermediates
and more advanced lifters along with a huge
collection of meal plans and science based
supplementation advice then you can grab my
complete Body Transformation Blueprint by
clicking here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
Make sure to follow me on Facebook, Twitter
and Instagram if you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
if you found the advice useful feel free to
share the video, comment, like and subscribe
to stay up to date.
Thanks for watching and I’ll see you in
the next video.