Hey, what’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.seannal.com - www.bodytransformationtruth.com
and I’m actually going to do a quick simple
video today for a change and I just want to
share with you guys one of my favorite free
weight bicep curling exercise which is the
seated incline dumbbell curl.
Yes, a good majority of your bicep growth
is going to come simply as a result of adding
more weight overtime to your vertical and
your horizontal pulling exercises for your
back.
And yes, there are a lot of different bicep
curl exercise out there that will work effectively
as long as you use proper form, but you might
as well optimize thing if you can and the
seated incline dumbbell curl is a great exercise
to try out.
The position of the seated incline dumbbell
curl it lets you get a really good stretch
in your biceps at the bottom because your
arms are going to be slightly behind your
body and if you do this using the proper form
that I’m about to show you then you will
feel this working probably more so or probably
more effectively rather, in comparison to
other free weight biceps curl variations.
So, to do the seated incline dumbbell curl,
and this is just a lightweight demo, you’ll
want to adjust an incline bench at roughly
a 45 degree angle and hold a pair of dumbbells
at your sides with your palms facing up and
then curl the dumbbells up until you feel
a full contraction in your biceps and then
lower them back down to the starting position.
So, the basic from is very simple but there
are a lot of little tweaks that you can make
to really maximize the effectiveness of the
movement.
So, first off don’t allow your elbows to
excessively drift forward as you curl the
weight up, because this moves tension off
the biceps and on to the front delts, a bit
of movement is fine but try to keep your elbows
relatively stationary.
Secondly, don’t curl the weights so high
up that the tension leaves the biceps, you
just want to curl the weight up to the point
where you feel a full contraction I your biceps
and then stop there and let the weight back
down.
Also keep your elbows at your sides throughout
the movement and don’t allow them to flare
outward.
You also want to keep your wrist align in
a neutral or slightly extended position because
if you flexed your wrist during the curling
movement then it bring your forearms more
into play.
And lastly to get a full stretch in the biceps
and get the largest range of motion possible,
you can slightly flex your triceps at the
bottom of each rep.
So, just want to share something quick with
you guys today.
Give the sated incline dumbbell curl a try
and see what you think.
Again, direct biceps training is definitely
not rocket science but if you combine the
position of this exercise with all of the
form tips that I just gave you then I think
you’re really going to like this one.
So, thanks for watching guys, as always make
sure to like, comment and subscribe.
You can follow me on social media here.
The official website is www.seannal.com and
you can also grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.bodytransformationtruth.com,
the link in the description and that will
show all of my recommended exercises along
with video tutorials, plus the step-by-step
workouts, meal plans and supplement plans
that I recommend.
See you guys in the next video.