Hey, what’s going on guys?
Just wanted to post up a quick video here
before I head off to the gym, just showing
you guys a very simple way that you can use
your protein powder aside from regular shakes.
And that is to actually use your protein powder
to make protein coffee by using it as a coffee
creamer.
That might sound kind of weird, but whey does
come from dairy.
So it does make sense.
And it actually does taste pretty good.
So, there’s really not much to it.
You’ve got coffee, you’ve got whey protein
and you’re just going to mix the two together.
I’m currently out of my normal tag of protein
powder.
So I just picked up this pocket here just
so I can make this video for you guys.
I’m going to try to pour this in carefully
without spilling.
But I’m trying to kind of balance the camera
here at the same time.
So, again, just damp the protein powder in
there, like so.
And then you’re just going to mix it together.
Now, depending on what type of protein powder
you’re using, it may take a shorter or longer
time to mix up.
But let’s give this one a try here.
So, it does take a decent amount of mixing.
This one -- this one mixes up really good
actually.
I don’t think I got the whole pocket in
there.
But just mix it together like that.
And then one other small addition I like to
make is to throw in some cinnamon.
And so, there you have it, protein coffee.
And it actually tastes pretty good.
Yes, I’m using this just kind of as a pre-workout
drink at the moment.
This one here is chocolate flavor.
You can pretty much use any flavor that you
want.
That’s just a matter of preference.
But I do prefer using the coffee -- sorry,
the chocolate flavor for this.
And again like I mentioned, different protein
powders will mix up harder or easier, depending
on the brand.
But if you really just go at it and stir it
around quite a bit, most protein powders will
blend up in there.
So, yes, just a quick idea for you guys.
I hope you like this.
Make sure to like, comment, subscribe, share
all that good stuff.
And the official website is Seannal.com.
And I’ll talk to you guys again, soon.