Hey, guys, Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here, with a muscle in minutes Q&A, where
I answer your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less.
Today's question is on the topic of weight
gainer.
So basically, what is the number one mass
gainer or weight gainer that I would recommend
people use?
As a general overarching rule, I don't recommend
the use of weight gain powders or mass gainer
powders.
I did do a video on this a couple months ago,
for the simple reason that most of these shakes
are really nothing more than a combination
of whey protein, which is really good as a
protein source.
But the carbohydrate source is almost entirely
made up of one single ingredient.
And that is maltodextrin, which is nothing
more than a basic simple sugar.
And most of these shakes contain quite a high
amount as well, usually 60, 70, 80, 90grams
or more of maltodextrin per serving.
Now, if this is being used once in a while.
If it's a convenience thing, you're on the
go, you needed to get some calories in really
conveniently, that's fine.
But I definitely wouldn't recommend the use
of these sorts of mass gainer shakes on a
consistent basis for the simple reason that
the maltodextrin is not going to provide you
with any real value in terms of fiber content
or vitamin and mineral content, which is very
important when selecting carbohydrate sources
for your diet.
So, the very simple way to go about this is
if -- is if you need a high calorie shake,
just make it yourself.
Get a high quality whey protein powder and
then mixing your own carbs.
There's an endless number of different weight
gain recipes you could use.
I'll link you to a video that I did a couple
months back, outlining a recipe that I really
like, which is whey protein as the protein
source, the carb is coming from a banana and
oatmeal, and the healthy fat is coming from
natural peanut butter.
That's just one example.
There's a ton of different ways you can do
this.
But making your own mass gainer shakes at
home is going to provide you with much higher
quality overall nutrition, more fiber, vitamins,
minerals, healthy fats.
And if you do it properly, it's going to talk
a lot better as well.
So again, the commercial mass gainer powders
can be used once in a while, if you just need
to get some quick calories in.
But for the most part, if you want a higher
calorie shake, just make it at home.
And if you do want to check out a very high
quality whey protein powder that you can use
as part of those mass gainer shakes, you can
check out our IsoM3 formula over on EliteImpactLabs.com,
which is a 100% micro-filtered, ultra-filtered
whey isolates.
So, a very high quality formula there, and
again, I'll link that below if you do want
to check it out.
So, that is that question answered.
I hope you found this useful.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link the description
box, which includes a free work plan, meal
plan and supplement guide.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
And I'll talk you again soon with more free
tips.