As mentioned before, two meta-analyses indicate 
light loads can produce similar muscle growth to  
heavier loads, when reps are performed to or close 
to failure. The point at which no more repetitions  
can be performed. Meta-analyses are studies that 
combine the results of numerous individual studies  
looking at the same topic. In the two meta-analyses, most studies use loads from 30% to  
85% percent of a person's one rep max, equating to roughly reps between 35 and 5. I  
should note that, for example, you could have two 
different individuals perform reps to failure with  
an 85 percent one-rep max load on the back squat, 
yet they could achieve a different number of reps.  
Additionally, the exercise could play a role. For 
instance, Mitchell and colleagues found that with  
a 30% one-rep max load on the leg 
extension, subjects perform roughly between 30  
and 40 reps to failure. But Okazi and colleagues 
found that with a 30% one0rep max load  
on the dumbbell curl, subjects performed roughly 
60 to 80 reps to failure. So, keep this in mind  
when thinking about the relationship between 
relative loading and repetition number. Anyway, on  
the bottom end of the spectrum, we have quite a few 
studies indicating a 30%  one-rep max load  
can produce similar hypertrophy to heavier 
loads. Returning to the Mitchell and colleagues study,  
they had subjects perform 3 sets to failure on 
the leg extension with either a 30% one  
rep max load or an 80% one-rep max load, 
3 times per week for 10 weeks. Increases in  
quadriceps volume were similar when using a 30% or 80% one-rep max load. One  
strong reason behind why loads as light as this 
can produce similar muscle growth to heavier loads  
relates to mechanical tension. This is probably 
the best understood mechanism of muscle growth  
at this time A key component of mechanical tension 
is active tension. This is equal to the force  
produced by a muscle. High levels of muscle fiber 
recruitment and high levels of force generated by  
the recruited muscle fibers means high levels of 
active tension, and by extension, mechanical tension. 
Heavier loads readily demand high levels of 
muscle fiber recruitment and high levels of force  
produced by the individual muscle fibers. As you 
near failure, these things would likely increase  
further to a degree. However evidence indicates 
light loads can achieve these conditions too.  
Taking a light load too or very close to failure 
will require increased muscle fiber recruitment  
and force produced by the individual muscle 
fibers. Ultimately resulting in a similar stimulus  
to heavier loads. If we were to take these ideas 
alone, an interesting question arises. Why would  
a load be too light for muscle growth? So long 
as we take any load to or very close to failure,  
surely high levels of muscle fiber recruitment 
and high levels of force produced by those fibers  
would be present?  1000 reps, so long as the 
last rep was failure, should be as good as  
10 reps to failure. However, instinctively this 
does not sound right. One potential hypothesis  
that can help us here relates to central 
fatigue. Remember, the reason muscles produce  
force is because they receive electrical signals 
originating from the central nervous system, so the  
brain and spinal cord. Simply, the more electrical 
signals a muscle receives, the more muscle fibers  
are recruited and the more force produced by the 
recruited muscle fibers. Central fatigue refers to  
a decrease in the electrical signal sent down to 
the muscle by the nervous system. This results in  
a reduction in muscle fiber recruitment and less 
force produced by some recruited muscle fibers.  
Opposite to what seems to be popular belief, low 
load, longer duration sets, appear to produce more  
central fatigue than higher load, shorter duration 
sets. For instance, Yoon and colleagues had 9
men and 9 women, on separate days, perform 
a contraction of their biceps at either 20%  
of their maximum voluntary contraction force or 
80 % of their maximum voluntary contraction force.  
They held each contraction until force declined by 
10% of the target force. On average, subjects  
held the 20% contraction for around 14 minutes before 
they could no longer produce the required force,  
whereas the 80% contraction was only held for 
around 25 seconds. But, the 20% contraction produced  
greater central fatigue than the 80% contraction. 
Other studies also support these findings.  
During sets on typical exercises, some degree 
of central fatigue will probably be present.  
As just established, lighter loads, when taken to 
or close to failure would produce more central  
fatigue than heavier loads. Given evidence 
indicates loads as light as 30% one-rep max  
can produce similar hypertrophy to heavier loads, 
we can safely say any central fatigue produced  
with this load is probably not an issue. But it is 
possible that some load below 30% of your  
one-rep max, whereby if taken to failure, may fail to 
achieve sufficiently high levels of muscle fiber  
recruitment and force produced by the recruited 
muscle fibers, due to the interference of central  
fatigue. lLet us now move away from the theory and 
look at the actual research. There have been a few  
papers assessing the impacts of using loads below 
30 one-rep max for hypertrophy. Some of these failed  
to have subjects train to failure, which isn't 
really helpful, so we won't bother evaluating them.  
Jessee and colleagues had untrained men and 
women perform 4 sets on the knee extension to  
volitional failure either with a 15% one-rep max 
load or a 70% one-rep max load. Subjects trained  
twice per week for 8 weeks. I should note that 
with the 15% one-rep max condition,  
if any subject got up to 90 reps , the set was stopped even if they did  
not reach volitional failure. Ultimately, only 2
subjects out of 40 achieve this for all 4 sets,  
so it's probably not an issue. Increases 
in lateral and anterior thigh thickness  
were similar between the 15% and 70% one-rep max condition, indicating a 15%  
one-rep max load may still be able to maximize 
hypertrophy. An interesting thing about this study  
was the 15% one-rep max condition had subjects 
use only a 30 second rest interval between sets,  
while the 70% one-rep max condition 
had subjects use a 90-second rest interval.  
This did not seem to impact the results. However, 
there is research that conflicts with this study.  
Buckner and colleagues had untrained men and 
women perform 4 sets to volitional failure  
on the dumbbell biceps curl with either a 
15% one-rep max load or a 70
% one-rep max load. Subjects trained twice 
per week for 8 weeks. Like the last study, if  
subjects were able to get up to 90 reps with 
the 15% one-rep max load, the set was  
stopped even if they had not reached volitional 
failure. Based on the data provided, subjects in  
the 15% one-rep max condition, on 
average, reached 90 reps on the first set but  
from sets 2 to 4, their sets were terminated 
before 90 reps, indicating they achieved volitional  
failure. Increases in elbow flexor thickness were 
greater for the 70% one0rep max condition,  
suggesting a 15% one-rep max load 
may be too light to maximize muscle growth.  
This study was pretty much identical in design 
to the previous study. They also had the 15%
one-rep max condition use a 30 second rest interval between sets, while the  
70% one-rep max condition used a 
90 second rest interval. This could have  
impacted the results, but given it did not impact 
the Jessee and colleagues results, it's difficult  
to say. Interestingly, the only difference between 
these two studies was that Jessee and colleagues  
study used leg extensions, while the Buckner and 
colleagues study used the dumbbell biceps curl. 
Maybe a 15% one-rep max load can maximize 
muscle growth with the lower body, but not with  
the muscles of the upper body. However, a study 
by Lasevicius and colleagues would question this.  
They had untrained men perform the dumbbell 
biceps curl and leg press for an average of  
3 to 5 sets to failure each, twice per 
week for 12 weeks. Subjects either used a 20,  
40, 60, or 80% one-rep max load 
with each exercise. All conditions involved  
120 seconds of rest between sets. Increases 
in cross-sectional area of the elbow flexors  
and vastus lateralis were similar between the 
40, 60, and 80% one-rep max conditions,  
and all greater than the 20% one-rep
max condition, indicating a 20% one  
rep max load is not able to maximize muscle growth 
for the upper or lower body A study by Roie and  
colleagues further confuses things. They had older 
untrained men and women train the leg press and  
leg extension, twice per week for 12 weeks. Subjects 
either trained  each exercise with 1 set to  
failure with a 20% one-rep max load 
or they trained to each exercise with 2 sets to  
failure with an 80% one-rep max load. 
Subjects use two minutes of rest between sets.  
Increases in upper leg volume were similar between 
both groups, suggesting a 20% one-rep
max load can maximize muscle growth. Interestingly, 
the 20% one-rep max condition  
involved only 1 set for each exercise, while the 
80% one-rep max condition involved 2
sets for each exercise. The extra set did not seem 
to help the 80% one-rep max condition.  
Now, the subjects were older men and women. So 
it's not clear how this study design would impact  
young men and women. To sum up, the current evidence, unfortunately, does not give us a straight answer.  
2 studies indicate loads between 15% and 20% one-rep max
can maximize hypertrophy, albeit 1 study was done 
on older subjects, while 2 other studies suggest  
loads between 15% and 20% one-rep max do not maximize hypertrophy. Because  
of the conflicting evidence, it's probably sensible 
to ensure that if your goal is hypertrophy,  
most of your training should be done within the 
30% to 85% one-rep max 
zone. Generally speaking though, although loads as 
low as 30% one-rep max appear to be  
able to maximize growth, I don't think many train 
regularly with this type of loading. Most people  
tend to find a light load training much more 
miserable and painful than heavier load training.  
Although this video may not have much 
practical takeaway, hopefully it was  
helpful in some way. Our next video will have 
some potential practical takeaways, we'll be  
evaluating if using different rep ranges in your 
training program could improve muscle growth. 