Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com
with a Q & A video, and today's question is
in regards to post workout nutrition, and
more specifically, what the very best post
workout protein source is going to be for
supporting muscle recovery and growth in the
most effective way. So post-workout nutrition
is far from rocket science. Most lifters totally
over analyze this area of their program and
get completely lost in small details that
ultimately make no real difference to their
bottom line results. Selecting the best post
workout protein source is really no exception
here. The honest truth is that any source
of high quality protein consumed within a
few hours of completing your workout is going
to be enough to produce optimal results in
this area of your diet plan. I discussed this
in detail in my previous video "The Best Muscle
Building Protein Sources" which I will link
up above here and down below in the description
box, but by "high quality" I'm simply referring
to complete protein sources with relatively
high branched chain amino acid content and
that have a high absorption rate in the body.
So lean poultry, lean red meat, eggs, fish,
seafood, protein powder, so whey, egg, casein,
etcetera. These are all perfectly acceptable
choices for post workout protein sources and
it's really not going to make any noticeable
difference to your bottom line results regardless
of which one of these you choose. Remember,
protein digestion and absorption is a very
gradual process, so as long as you're eating
a balanced diet throughout the day, amino
acids, which are the building blocks of protein,
are being continually released into your bloodstream
and they're going to be readily available
to support muscle recovery and growth whenever
you need them. So if you ate a standard pre-workout
meal within a few hours of your training session,
it's actually going to be the protein from
that meal and from previous meals that is
still being broken down and utilized even
after your workout is over. And so for that
reason, consuming a fast absorbing source
of protein after your workout which, by the
way, is still going to be broken down relatively
slowly anyway, that's not going to do anything
to improve your results above and beyond any
other source of a high quality protein that
you might choose from. And on top of this,
all protein sources are ultimately broken
down into their individual amino acid components
after you consume them anyway and it only
takes a relatively small amount of essential
amino acids in order to maximize protein synthesis
anyway. So as long as you're choosing one
of my recommended high quality protein sources,
you're easily going to be receiving enough
of the individual amino acids that are necessary
in order to optimize recovery and your resulting
muscle growth. So the bottom line is that
the specific absorption rate of your post-workout
protein source isn't going to make any real
difference to your results, nor will the specific
amino acid content as long as you're choosing
a high quality source. And for that reason,
just go ahead and choose whatever source of
protein you most prefer for your post workout
meal and consume it within a couple hours
of completing your workout. If that happens
to be a liquid whey protein shake that's fine,
if you want to have steak and potatoes that's
fine, if you want to have salmon and rice
that's fine. When it comes to optimal muscle
building and fat burning nutrition, just focus
on the big picture by meeting your overall
protein, carbohydrate and fat needs for the
day and meeting those needs from a variety
of high quality sources. So thanks for watching
this video. I hope you found the information
useful. Please make sure to hit the LIKE button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos. And make sure to check out
my complete step-by-step muscle building and
fat loss programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link at the top of the video here
or the link in the description box below.
Talk to you again soon.