Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to give a very simple answer
to the people who message me here on YouTube
and on Facebook and to my email, saying that
they're putting their time in at the gym,
they are following a proper diet, they're
supplementing, they're sleeping well every
night but they are still aren't gaining a
noticeable amount of muscle mass.
Now this is a foundational beginners type
of lesson so many of you watching this are
already going to have a very good understanding
of the principles I'm about to outline but
I did want to address this nonetheless.
Now before I give you the 3 very simple reasons
why you aren't gaining muscle right now let
me first clarify that achieving significant
muscle gains for an average natural trainee
takes time and patience so if your idea of
"failing to gain muscle" is that you haven't
put 2 inches on your arms in 4 weeks then
it really is time for a reality check here
because the whole thing is a very gradual
process and if you're gaining somewhere around
half a pound to 1 pound of relatively lean
body weight per week and your lifts are going
up in the gym consistently then you're actually
on the right track and you probably just need
some more time in order to see those gains
unfold.
However, if you are in a place of real stagnation
and your body weight, your strength and your
muscle measurements are really not budging
at all, then you're guaranteed to be making
at least 1 of the 3 following mistakes.
So, Mistake #1, You’re just not training
hard enough, period.
Muscle growth is an adaptive response to stress
and if you aren’t using up a sufficient
percentage of your muscle’s available momentary
resources on each individual set that you
perform then your body has NO incentive at
all to build upon its existing resources by
increasing the size and strength of your muscles.
Your body has no idea that you’re standing
there, listening to music in an air-conditioned
gym lifting barbells, dumbbells and cables.
All your body is responding to is the direct
physical demands that are being placed on
it and if it already has enough available
resources to respond to those demands with
relative ease, then there's really no incentive
for any change to occur.
So, get serious.
Every single set that you perform should be
a fully focused effort, and those last few
reps should be downright uncomfortable and
very hard to perform.
So, if they're not you’re just not training
hard enough.
Now my recommendation here is to perform every
set within a rep range of about 5 to 12 and
to continue each set about 1 to 2 reps short
of concentric muscular failure.
Concentric failure is the point in the set
where you can't complete any additional reps
using proper form despite giving an all-out
effort.
And this level of intensity is going to be
sufficient in order to stimulate hypertrophy
to an optimal level.
Mistake #2 is that you’re Ignoring the law
of progressive overload.
So putting forth a good hard effort in the
gym is going to be the first foundational
step but it’s only half of the equation
and that’s because in order for you to see
continual, ongoing gains in muscle size over
time, you must be continually progressing
in the amount of weight that you lift and
or the number of reps that you perform on
all of your major exercises.
Now this is known as the “law of progressive
overload”, and it is absolutely central
to your entire training program.
If you’re bench pressing 150 pounds today,
and you're still using the same weight 8 weeks
from now then your body will again have no
incentive to adapt further, and your muscle
gains are going to stagnate.
So the solution is very simple and that is
to keep a training logbook and for every workout
that you perform, write down the exercises
that you perform, the weight that you lifted
and number of reps executed and then center
your entire workout program around “beating
the logbook” by either adding extra weight
to the bar on the following workout, usually
about 5 to 10 pounds for your big compound
lifts and 2 and a half to 5 pounds for your
smaller isolation lifts.
Doing that or squeezing out a few extra reps
using the same weights while staying in that
5 to 12 rep range, and you're going to be
amazed at how quickly this adds up over just
a few months even.
So the simple combination of training at least
1 to 2 reps short of concentric muscular failure
on every exercise that you perform and progressing
in weight and reps every single week is a
sure-fire, 100% guaranteed method for ongoing
muscle growth and if you aren’t seeing measurable
progress right now, then one or both of these
factors is definitely off.
And the final mistake is that you're just
not eating enough.
Assuming that you are training with sufficient
intensity, and you are focusing on getting
stronger in the gym each week then the solution
to your muscle building plateau is even simpler
and that is that your overall calorie intake
is too low.
Now I’ve talked about this a million times
before but if you aren’t creating a consistent
“calorie surplus” every single day by
consuming more calories than you burn, you
are absolutely not going to gain any appreciable
amount of muscle.
Your body already has energy demands in place
in order to sustain your current body weight,
and it has to be provided with the extra fuel
that is necessary in order to build new muscle
tissue.
So if your overall body weight isn’t budging
then you can be guaranteed of the fact that
you’re simply not eating enough.
So to get some good basic starting point numbers
for your individual calorie needs in order
to gain muscle, just plug your stats into
my free bodybuilding macronutrient calculator
which I will link in the description box below
and that calculator is going to show you exactly
how many calories you need each day along
with a breakdown of proteins, carbs and fats
as well.
And if you want to get a full understanding
of exactly where all of these figures are
coming from and how they’re being calculated
then I'll also link another article below
for you to check out as well.
So, I'm certainly not claiming that these
3 points are the be-all-end-all of gaining
lean muscle but they do make up the foundation
of the entire process and are by far the most
important principles that you need to be aware
of.
Yes, there are many other things you can do
in order to optimize your gains further but
if you just employ those 3 strategies consistently,
you WILL gain muscle on an ongoing basis.
It would be physically impossible for you
to not gain muscle, and on the flip side if
one or more of those elements is not in place
then it's going to be physically impossible
for you to gain muscle or at least to gain
muscle to any significant degree over time.
So thanks alot for watching this video lesson.
If you did find the information useful here
today please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment and subcribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below and make sure to join the Facebook page
for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.