Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here, with another bodybuilding video lesson
for you. And today, I want to discuss the
topic of what to do if you're training hard
in the gym, trying to loss fat, but you're
not getting any real results. So, we've all
seen that guy or girl at the gym who always
seems to be there, running on the treadmill,
lifting weights, taking spin classes or whatever
else, but who always seems to look the same week
after week, and month after month. And if
you're watching this video, maybe that at
least somewhat describes you. But how is it
possible that someone could put in so much
effort at the gym and still not lose a pound
of fat? Well, it's actually very simple. And
it's known as the "Law of Energy Balance."
Beyond specific workout nutrition and supplementation
principles, losing body fat ultimately comes
down to one very simple truth. And that is
that you must create and maintain a calorie
deficit where you are consistently burning
more calories than you consume. It doesn't
matter how hard you train in the gym, and
it doesn't matter how healthy you think you're
eating. If you aren't in a calorie deficit,
you aren't going to lose an ounce of fat,
period. Body fat is a stored form of energy,
and by creating a calorie deficit where the
total amount of calories that you consume
each day is insufficient to fuel your daily
needs, you force your body to break down that
excess fat to use as a source of fuel. It's
really as simple as that. And this is why
it's perfectly possible to train your ass
off in the gym, six days a week, and still
not see any positive -- sorry, positive
results at all from your effort. If you're
simply going home and then replacing all of
those burnt calories through your diet, you're
not going to make any progress at all. And
since weight training and cardio stimulates
your appetite, the people who aren't aware
of this basic foundational principle will
often over-eat without even realizing it.
Remember, it's way easier to consume 400 calories
through your diet, than it is to burn 400
calories at the gym. It might take 45 minutes
of running on a treadmill to burn 400 calories,
while a couple of extra snacks per day will
easily replace that same amount. Even if you're
following what you consider to be a healthy
diet, it will make absolutely no difference
at all if the total calorie content is too
high. Speaking purely in terms of fat loss,
the person who eats cookies, and chips and
ice cream but maintains a calorie deficit
is far and away ahead of the person who eats
rice, and chicken and broccoli but eats at
their calorie maintenance level. So, the simple
solution is to start tracking your diet. Even
if you're not tracking it with absolute precision,
you still need to have a basic idea of your
overall calorie needs for fat loss, and what
you're consuming throughout the day. If you
don't, you may end up wasting weeks, months
or even years of effort getting absolutely
nowhere. So, the basic process is actually
very simple, and I've covered it in several
previous videos. But the first step is to
determine your calorie maintenance level.
And this is the number of calories that you
need to consume daily in order to maintain
your current weight. And the second step is
to reduce your calorie maintenance level by
15% to 20%. And this will create a calorie
deficit that's large enough to stimulate optimal
fat loss while protecting your lean muscle
tissue and without starving yourself. For
most people, the Harris Benedict Formula will
work well to calculate this. And to make it
even easier, you can just check out our free
macronutrient calculator, which automates
the whole process for you, and I'll link that
below in the description box. You're just
going to enter in a few basic stats about
yourself, and that calculator will then determine
not only your daily calorie needs, but your
protein carbohydrate and fat requirements
as well. So, again, you don't have to nail
this down with 100% precision. But if you
can at least hit those numbers with reasonable
accuracy, your results are going to skyrocket
in comparison to the person who completely
ignores this aspect of their fat burning program.
So, I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful. As always if you did
enjoy the video, please make sure to hit the
like button, leave a comment and subscribe
to stay up-to-date on future videos. And make
sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook
page, for free daily articles, tips, videos
and free supplement giveaways. Thanks again
for watching. And I'll talk to you again soon
with more free tips.