Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com
with a Q & A video, and today's question is
about the calves and specifically why they're
such a hard muscle group to build if you have
thin calves that don't naturally respond well
to training. So in many cases this is partially
due to improper programming and poor calf
training technique, but the honest truth is
that packing size onto naturally skinny calves
really can be quite a challenge and there
are two concrete reasons for this. The first
is due to anatomical disadvantage, basically.
Guys with naturally skinny calves tend to
have a longer calf tendon along with shorter
calf muscles than insert higher up on their
lower leg. So the longer your calf tendon
is and the shorter your calf muscles are,
the less potential you're going to have for
growth, and this simply because you're going
to have less muscle to work with from the
start and even when you do add some size there,
making these muscles pop out is especially
difficult. A long calf tendon and short calf
muscles is great for explosive movements like
sprinting and jumping, but it's really not
so great when it comes to adding mass. And
the second reason is low androgen receptor
density. Androgen receptors are the areas
of the muscle where testosterone attaches
to in order to stimulate protein synthesis,
and although there are going to be exceptions,
androgen receptor density in men tends to
be highest in the upper body and lowest in
the lower body, with the absolute lowest density
being found in the calves. And as a result
of that, testosterone can't exert a very significant
effect on the calf muscles, which makes stimulating
new growth in this area particularly challenging
regardless of how well you train them. So
where do you go from here if you have stubborn
calves that don't seem to grow no matter what
you do? Well two points I'll make on this.
First of all, I'm definitely not saying that
you can't build your naturally thin calves
up to a reasonable level of development, all
I'm saying is that it will likely be a longer
road and it will require more patience and
dedication than your other muscle groups.
The point of this Q & A is not to discourage
you, but rather just to give you an honest
and realistic explanation of why the calves
can often be a hard muscle to build, and that
it will definitely be a challenge if your
calves don't naturally respond well to training.
And secondly is just learn how to train with
maximum effectiveness. So you'll want to get
every possible advantage you can in that area,
and many guys really do make quite a few important
errors when it comes to their calf training
strategy. So I'd highly recommend checking
out 2 resources which I'll link up here and
in the Description box below. The first is
a video I posted today that outlines 4 very
important calf training tips that you'll definitely
want to be aware of and implement in your
program. And the second is an article over
on my website that discusses proper exercise
selection, and I also provide some good sample
calf workouts in that post as well. So thanks
for watching this video. I hope you found
this Q & A useful. If you did enjoy the video
please make sure to hit the "like" button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos. Also make sure to check
out my complete step-by-step muscle building
and fat loss programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the icon in the top corner of the video
or using the link in the Description box below.
Talk to you again soon.