Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, here of EliteImpactLabs.com,
with the muscle in minutes Q&A, where I provide
quick-to-the-point, no B.S.
answers to your bodybuilding and fitness questions.
Today's question is on the issue of the glycemic
index and whether or not it is a useful tool
when it comes to selecting carbohydrates for
your muscle building or your fat burning diet.
So, for those of you who don't know what the
glycemic index is, it's basically a chart
which ranks carbohydrates from 0 to 100 based
on how quickly they raise blood glucose levels
after they are consumed.
And a lot of people will go with the idea
that they need to consumer "Low glycemic carbohydrates"
because these carbohydrates are going to -- going
to be broken down in a more gradual pace,
provide you with more steady energy that are
less likely to be stored as body fat.
The fundamental problem with the glycemic
index is that the rankings that are assigned
to each carbohydrate are based on the effects
that those carbohydrates have when they are
consumed alone in a fasted state.
Now, you almost never consume your carbohydrates
alone in a fasted state.
You almost always combine them with proteins
and fats.
And when you do combine them with proteins
or fats, for example, you take a white potato,
which does have a fairly high glycemic index
ranking, and you combine it with a stake and,
you know, some -- some vegetables, the entire
glycemic response to that meal is going to
be lowered significantly.
So, there's no real way for you to even know
what the specific blood glucose response will
be for specific carbohydrates as part of a
complete meal, just by looking at the glycemic
index alone.
Choosing carbohydrates for your bodybuilding
diet is actually extremely straightforward.
All I would really recommend that you focus
on is on getting the bulk of your carbohydrates
from higher fiber minimally refined sources.
So, somewhere around 70%, 80%, 90% of your
diet should be coming from those types of
carbohydrates.
So, we're talking about things like oatmeal,
you know, sweet potatoes, whole grains, fruits,
vegetables, these types of carbohydrates.
They're going to be higher in fiber, more
micronutrient dense.
And as long as you're getting the bulk of
your diet from those types of carbs, there's
really no need to analyze it any further.
Worrying about specific glycemic index rankings,
so low glycemic or high glycemic or the specific
absorption rate of your carbohydrates, it's
really just a total non-issue.
So, glycemic index is essentially a useless
tool when it comes to selecting carbohydrates
for your diet.
Just focus on getting the bulk of those carbs
from high fiber minimally refined sources.
If you're doing that, you can also get a smaller
amount from so called, "Cheap foods" as long
as you're tracking it as part of your overall
macronutrient intake, but that's really all
you need to worry about.
So, I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide, which you can get over
on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
I appreciate all the support.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.