Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
EliteImpactLabs.com with a Muscle in Minutes
Q & A, where I provide quick to the point
no BS answers to your bodybuilding and fitness
questions. Today's question is, does heat
destroy whey protein? So you might be asking
this question for one of two reasons. Either
you have tub of whey protein that's been sitting
in a warm location for awhile and you're wondering
if the protein is still good or you are cooking
with your whey protein and you want to know
if the, if heating up the whey protein destroys
it or affects it in any way. So the simple
answer here is that whey protein just like
all proteins are basically a 3D structure
that is made up of individual building blocks
called amino acids and when you heat up the
protein you do denature it, which basically
means that that 3D protein structure gets
unravelled and broken down a little bit, however,
this does not actually affect the whey protein
in any functional way because when you consume
whey protein that's what your body does with
it anyway. It breaks the protein down into
the individual amino acid building blocks
to be used throughout your body. So denaturing
the protein really isn't a bad thing whether
you denature the protein when you're making
a protein pancake on your oven or whether
it gets denatured when you chew it up and
swallow it and it mixes up with all the digestive
enzymes in the stomach and the acids, etcetera,
it really makes no difference. At the end
of day your body is going to break that down
into the individual amino acid building blocks
anyway and so denaturing the protein by heating
it up really makes no difference from a functional
standpoint. So that's that question answered.
I hope you found this useful today. If you
did enjoy the video, as always, please make
sure to hit the Like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos. Also make sure to grab your free "28
Day Mass Building Plan" using the link in
the description box below that includes a
free workout plan, meal plan and supplement
guide which you can grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com
and make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video, I appreciate
all the support and I'll talk to you again
soon with more free tips.