Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and today
I want to explain one of the latest protein
powder scams that's going on and it's happening
with even some of the biggest companies out
there and it's the practice of amino acid
spiking.
So, whey protein is one of the very few fitness
supplements out there that gets a definite
thumbs up for me.
It's a very high quality source of natural
protein with a top amino acid profile, high
bio-availability and it helps you hit your
overall protein and calorie needs throughout
the day in a far more convenient and streamlined
way.
It certainly isn't mandatory, but for most
muscle building and fat loss trainees it definitely
can help out.
But with whey protein costs contantly on the
rise right now, and with literally thousands
of different brands out there for you to select
from, you need to choose carefully in order
to ensure that you're truly getting a high
quality product.
So what is amino acid spiking?
Well, as you probably already know, amino
acids are the individual building blocks that
make up a complete protein.
There are 22 standard amino acids that are
recognized with 9 of those being considered
essential since your body can't make them
on its own.
Amino acid spiking is essentially the practice
of dumping high amounts of the cheapest, least
valuable amino acids into the powder in order
to cut costs, while keeping the total protein
content elevated.
For labeling purposes the total protein gram
amount that's listed on the product is based
on the total nitrogen content, and as a result,
even though these isolated amino acids are
technically not protein they'll still contribute
to the total.
And this means that you're not getting a complete
source of protein when using these products
and it also means that you're getting higher
amounts of some of the least effective amino
acids for supporting muscle protein synthesis
and recovery.
The specific amounts that are used are certainly
going to vary from product to product, but
to my knowledge some companies are currently
spiking as much as half of their total protein
content with these low quality aminos.
In other words you might think that you're
getting 30 grams of high quality protein per
scoop, when in reality you're only getting
maybe 15 grams along with a bunch of nearly
worthless filler.
Even for the companies that do this on a smaller
scale with maybe just a few grams of these
amino acids per scoop, in which case it probably
isn't going to actually impact your bottom
line results in a negative way, why would
you purchase a spiked protein powder when
there are so many other legitimate options
available to you?
Why not get your full money's worth?
And on top of this, why would you want to
support a company that is being blatantly
dishonest with you?
So how do you know if your protein powder
is spiked?
Well, just go ahead and look at the ingredient
list on the label of the product that you're
using.
The first thing that you're going to see is
the type of protein listed, whether it be
whey concentrate, whey isolate, a blend of
the two, or a mix of other protein sources
like egg or casein or milk protein.
Then simply scan the rest of the ingredient
list to look for singular amino acids that
have been added in.
For the purposes of amino acid spiking, the
two most common amino acids you're going to
see are l-glycine and l-taurine.
These are two dirt cheap non-essential amino
acids that cost far less than the actual whey
protein.
Since they're also tasteless, adding them
in in high amounts helps to improve the overall
flavoring of the product.
Another thing that you can look out for is
added creatine.
Creatine is also far less expensive then whey
protein is and since it's a combination of
3 amino acids (l-glycine, l-arginine and l-methionine)
it also registers as part of the protein total.
Creatine is a great muscle building supplement
and it's something that I personally use and
do recommend, but the truth is that it has
no place in a protein powder and should simply
be purchased separately on its own.
So if you see l-glycine, l-taurine or creatine
listed anywhere in the ingredients list of
your protein powder it should raise a massive
red flag and in my opinion the specific product
should be avoided.
Although it's not a guarantee that these amino
acids are contributing to the protein total,
I'd say that the chances are near 100 percent
that that's why they're there.
And since supplement companies know that the
vast majority of people out there really have
no idea about this particular practice, they'll
actually play it up by giving fancy names
to the amino acids because it makes it look
like they're being added in for a specific
reason.
For example, one very popular brand out there
includes what they call an "NOS complex" in
their ingredient lists which is basically
just a mix of l-arginine and l-taurine.
Another popular product lists a "muscle recovery
matrix" and this is made up of creatine and
l-glycine.
It's really nothing more then pure marketing
BS.
And finally what are some good solid whey
protein products out there that are not spiked?
Well there are certainly many, many brands
out there for you to choose from, but 3 that
I would personally stand behind and recommend
are number 1 "Optimum Nutrition 100% Whey".
This is the one that I personally use.
Number 2, "Dymatize Elite Whey", and number
3, "Cellucor Core Performance Whey".
Now these products contain a clean blend of
whey protein isolate and whey protein concentrate
with whey protein isolate being the more prevalent
of the two.
They have no singular amino acids added in,
they mix well, they taste good and they're
also reasonably priced.
It should be noted that I'm not affiliated
with these specific brands and I don't stand
to gain anything by recommending one specific
protein brand over another.
So I'm really just giving you my very best
recommendation there.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.