What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, seannal.com, realscienceathletics.com.
In this video today, I want to challenge the
commonly-held idea that fat loss is a, quote-unquote,
"slow and gradual process" and just offer
a different perspective here that I think
you might find helpful.
Before I get started with the video, guys,
if you're new to the channel here and you
do find this content helpful, then don't forget
to hit the Subscribe button below to stay
up to date on future videos and also make
sure to follow me over on Instagram as well
where I post daily tips, training clips, meals,
and other updates that you'll definitely find
helpful.
It's @sean_nalewanyj.
That's where you'll find me when I'm not here
on YouTube.
Is fat loss really a, quote-unquote, "slow
process"?
I've referred to it that way in the past myself.
I get that it's a matter of perspective, but
lately, my thought on it is that it isn't
that fat loss happens slowly.
It's just that people have a skewed idea as
to what realistically constitutes a fast or
slow process.
Now, fast and slow are subjective terms, and
so there technically isn't one right or wrong
answer here, but I would say that if you really
break it all down and you put the fat-burning
process into context within your overall life
as whole, then with the right program in place,
you actually can lose body fat and improve
your overall physique relatively quickly.
Fat loss isn't necessarily a slow process.
Most people are just too impatient, and they
expect too much too quickly.
Now, weekly fat loss rates will vary depending
on the person.
It depends how much body fat you're carrying
right now and how large of a calorie deficit
you're comfortable using, but assuming you
have a proper plan in place and you're staying
reasonably consistent with it, most people
in most situations should be able to drop
at least one pound per week on average up
to about two pounds.
Some people who are significantly overweight
can often lose fat even faster than that,
at least in the initial stages of their program,
but let's go with somewhere between one to
two pounds per week for the average person
who's looking to lean down and lose their
excess fat.
That's not a slow rate of progress.
That's actually a pretty significant change
over a relatively short period of time.
That means in one month, you can lose somewhere
between 4-8 pounds, in two months, 8-16 pounds
in three months, 12-24 pounds.
In my view, any process where you can see
results that significant in just three months
should not be viewed as a slow process because
three months is not a long time in the overall
picture.
For a lot of people, depending on how much
fat they're carrying and how lean they're
trying to get, that might be all they need
in order to reach their fat loss goal.
If you can go from A to B with a particular
goal in three months, then I really don't
think there's anything to complain about there
from a time perspective.
Now, if you're carrying more fat or you're
trying to get leaner, then, yeah, maybe three
months isn't enough.
Maybe you need six months.
Even still, when you consider how long it
took you to gradually put that excess weight
on and you consider how quickly one month
goes by, and then you fit that into the context
of your life as a whole, I mean, if you live
an average lifespan of, say, 80 years, six
months represents less than half a 1% of your
entire life.
That's a pretty small fraction.
Even if you don't necessarily reach your ultimate
goal after six months, the bottom line is
that you'll still have made very significant
progress by that time.
There will probably be ups and downs along
the way.
No one's perfectly consistent with their program,
so maybe there are some setbacks that pop
up and that slow you down here and there,
but if you average, say, 1.5 pounds, that's
still 36 pounds you'll have dropped by that
point, which will make a huge difference to
how you look and feel.
Even at one pound per week, so 24 pounds after
six months, that's still very good progress,
not to mention that fat loss isn't the only
benefit that you'll be seeing along the way.
You'll likely also gain some muscle if you're
doing things right, you'll be getting physically
stronger, your health will improve, your cardiovascular
fitness will improve, your mood, your confidence.
There's a whole package of benefits that you'll
be getting all throughout that process within
a relatively short period.
If six months isn't long enough to get you
all the way to point B, maybe you're significantly
overweight and you need to drop quite a bit
of fat, okay, so maybe it takes a year.
Even one year is not a long time in the grand
scheme to get from point A to point B with
a significant goal, such as transforming your
entire body and your lifestyle and your mindset.
There are other life goals people work on
that take a lot longer than that.
Someone could work for three or five or 10
years-plus trying to create a successful business,
for example, and still never succeed at it.
That's the other thing when it comes to fitness,
which is that the end result is essentially
a built-in guarantee as long as you're on
the right program and you stick with it.
It's not the same as some other goals like
starting a business where you can literally
work your ass off for years on end with no
guarantee that your efforts are even going
to pay off, whereas with a proper training
and nutrition strategy in place, it's just
a matter of following the steps and being
consistent, and you will achieve the results.
A lot of other areas in life are much more
up in the air where there's no set timeline
for when you're going to see the results you're
after or any guarantee that you'll even get
that final result at all, so not only is fat
loss a relatively fast process in the overall
scheme, but you also have the added benefit
of knowing upfront that you basically can't
fail as long as you put in the effort and
you stay consistent.
Bottom line here, rather than thinking of
fat loss as this slow, arduous process, instead,
try changing your perspective a bit on what
it actually means for something to be slow
or fast in the first place.
I'm not encouraging you to rush things.
Again, one to two pounds a week on average
is probably what you should expect, and if
you're going much faster than that, then it
probably isn't going to be sustainable, and
you're likely going to eventually burn out
and have to slow down.
But if you have it in your mind that three
months or six months or even one year is this
massive time frame that you're going to have
to slowly grind through in order to reach
your goals, you'll be a lot more likely to
feel demotivated or maybe never even get started
at all, whereas on the other hand, if you
really put things into context, consider how
fast one week or one month goes by, wave that
off against your life as a whole, remember
that there are other life goals that take
a lot longer than that, and keep in mind that
your results are a built-in guarantee with
virtually no chance of failure if you just
implement the program, then it becomes a lot
more manageable in your mind, and you'll be
a lot more likely to actually stick with it
all the way through.
If you did find this piece of advice helpful
and you want to learn exactly how to map out
a complete step-by-step cutting plan in order
to truly guarantee yourself that final end
result, then make sure to take my physique
quiz over at quiz.seannal.com because that'll
remove all the guesswork for you and make
sure you're on the optimal training and nutrition
program for you based on your specific goals,
body type, and experience level.
You can click up here for that or use the
link in the description box below.
On the supplementation side of things, you
can also visit realscienceathletics.com to
check out my science-based no-BS formulas
to help fully streamline your results and
get the very most out of your fitness plan.
The link for that is also in the description.
Of course, make sure to hit that Like button,
leave a comment down below, and subscribe
if you haven't already in order to stay up
to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I'll see you
on the next one.