What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewayj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The question today is should you use a weightlifting
belt?
So, is a weightlifting belt necessary and
what are the pros and cons?
So, first off, what is the purpose of a weightlifting
belt?
The central purpose of a weightlifting belt
is to help you increase intra-abdominal pressure.
So on the plus side, that extra pressure increases
overall core stability which helps to support
your spine and lower back and it also allows
you to lift more weight.
On the negative side, it can reduce the development
of your core which in the long run can increase
your chance for injury and on top of that
it can also end up becoming a crutch that
you rely on and that you can’t lift properly
without.
So, who should actually use a weightlifting
belt?
It’s not a black and white thing, but the
simple overall, sort of bottom line answer
that I’d give is that the majority of lifters
don’t need to be wearing a weightlifting
belt the majority of the time.
A weightlifting belt should only be looked
at as an extra tool that some lifters will
benefit from in some situations.
So, first off, if you’re still in the beginning
stages of training and you’re otherwise
healthy then I definitely don’t recommend
the use of a weightlifting belt.
As a novice your goal should be to focus on
building overall size and strength foundation.
You’re not going to be lifting very heavy
weight at that point.
And so there’s no good reason to be wearing
a weightlifting belt, because it’s only
going to interfere with the development of
your core strength.
So bottom line if you’re a beginner, or
even a beginner/intermediate, don’t even
think about lifting belts and just focused
on proper form and on gradually increasing
your overall raw strength.
Secondly, if you’re an athlete who’s training
for a non-weightlifting sport then you’d
also want to use the belt very sparingly because
your goal with athletics is to build an overall
balanced and functional body.
And if you’re wearing a belt, sorry if you’re
not wearing a belt in you sport then frequently
using a belt in the weight room is not going
to be a good idea.
Third, you don’t need to use a belt on every
exercise or even on a large percentage of
exercises.
So you’ve probably seeing guys like this
in the gym, who walk in, wearing a weightlifting
belt right from the start and they keep it
on for the entire workout during every exercise
whether it’s a deadlift or a triceps kickback.
Again, you only want to use a belt when it’s
absolutely necessary.
You definitely don’t want to be using it
on exercises where you’re sitting or lying
down and wearing it for your entire workout
isn’t helping you either.
If anything it’s having the opposite effect,
you think that you’re protecting your lower
back but you’re actually just making your
core weaker and weaker, because it’s never
being worked naturally.
So if you are going to be using a belt, then
the only exercises where I’d recommend using
it would be on the squat, the deadlift or
the overhead press.
Not even necessarily all three, but those
are the main lifts where a belt can assist
you.
And number four, don’t bother with a belt
if you’re only using light to moderate loads
in medium to higher rep ranges.
So if you’re training with something like
a 70% of your one-rep max for say, eight to
ten reps, you don’t need a belt in that
situation.
Focus on correct technique and leave the belt
alone.
So those are the main situations where I wouldn’t
recommend using a weightlifting belt.
Remember that when you engaged your core properly
it already acts like an internal weightlifting
belt.
So you want to use that natural belt and build
up its strength as much as you can first before
moving on to using any sort of external belt.
And the way that you use your internal weightlifting
belt is by bracing your core during those
big compound lifts.
I won’t go into huge detail here, but basically
it just means drawing a big breath into your
belly before each rep, locking that air in
and then pushing your abs outward.
And a good cue for this is too perform the
same movement that you would as if someone
was about to punch you in the stomach.
And you want to be doing that whether you’re
using an actual weightlifting belt or not.
Now, with all of that out of the way that
leaves us with the situation when a weightlifting
belt could be useful.
And that is if you’re an intermediate or
advance lifter, you’ve naturally progress
without a belt to lifting fairly heavy weights,
so you’re squatting at least three plates
or deadlifting at least four.
You have a proper lifting technique and you’re
performing heavy sets around 85% or more of
your one-rep max.
Okay, with those factors in place a lifting
belt can be used as an extra tool to help
you complete the lift and to reduce the chances
of injury.
And even then it’s definitely not mandatory.
If you’re consistently progressing in weight
and your form is on point and your lower back
feels fine, then I would say to just continue
without a belt and only start using one if
it becomes absolutely necessary to really
help you pushed out to those higher numbers.
Just make sure that you’re using your belt
properly, which means that the belt is tight,
but also loose enough that you can get a full
breath into your stomach and brace your abs
and your core against the belt.
If you’re wearing your belt so tight you
can’t breathe properly then you’ll definitely
want to loosen it up.
And the one other exception here is for people
with pre-existing lower back injuries.
As long as you’re taking steps to actively
improve your lower back health whatever the
issue might be, so you’re working on building
up your core strength and as long as you’re
not using the belt as a band-aid fixed to
lift really heavy weights then a belt can
also be used in that situation if you find
that it reduces the stress on your lower back.
So bottom line guys, a weightlifting belt
is an optional extra tool that can be used
by more advanced lifters to lift heavy loads
or by people with lower back issues.
But it’s not going to do the work for you,
it’s not going to make up for bad form and
you still need to be incorporating separate
direct core training in your plan regardless.
So thanks for watching guys.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to get all the tools you need to gain muscle
and loose fat as effectively as possible,
the workouts, the meal plans, the supplement
guides, as well as one-on-one coaching then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video, as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching guys, and I’ll see you
in the next video.