What’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com.
In this video today, I want to give you guys,
two really great exercises for building bigger
forearms.
And specifically for targeting a muscle called
the “Brachioradialis”.
Now, this is a muscle that a lot of people
out there probably aren’t even familiar
with.
Don’t confuse it with the brachialis.
This is a muscle that I’ve talked about
before.
It sits underneath the biceps kind of between
the bicep and tricep on your upper arm.
But the brachioradialis is actually a muscle
that runs along the top of your forearm.
It’s kind of like a thick cord like muscle.
It originates towards the bottom of your upper
arm, and then it runs along the top of your
forearm right here.
So, this advice is going to be helpful for
those out there who have their forearms kind
of as a lagging muscle group, and one who
add more size there.
Or just for people who want to include some
more specialized forearm training in their
workouts.
So, in order to determine what the best brachioradialis
exercises are, we of course, need to take
a look at what the function of the muscle
is.
So, just like the biceps and the brachialis,
the brachioradialis also performs the function
of flexing the elbow.
But unlike the biceps or the brachialis the
brachioradialis becomes a primary flexor of
the elbow, only when your wrist is in either
a neutral or in a pronated position.
So, you can actually test this out for yourself
right now.
As you’re watching this video, just do like
a curling motion with one of your arms, but
do it in a normal palms up position like you
would for a regular bicep curl, and then flex
hard at the top.
Now, if you do that, you should feel your
bicep contracts pretty hard with some secondary
contraction in the brachioradialis.
But then do that same motion again, but put
your wrist in a neutral position and again,
flex hard at the top.
And in this situation, you’re still going
to feel your bicep contract, but you should
feel a much stronger contraction in that brachioradialis
muscle.
And then again, you can do it one more time
with your wrist in a pronated position.
So, in basic bodybuilding terms then, the
best exercises for hitting the brachioradialis
are going to be hammer curls as well as reverse
curls.
Now, there’s a lot of different variations
for either of these exercises.
You can perform hammer curls using dumbbells
in a standing, or a seated position or by
doing it on a preacher curl bench.
And for the reverse curls, you can do them
using an EZ curl bar, using dumbbells.
You can also do it using a straight bar if
that is comfortable on your wrist.
Though I do prefer the angle handles of the
EZ curl bar.
And you can even also do it on a preacher
curl bench as well.
Now, that said, I’m going to outline for
you now my two favorite brachioradialis exercises,
which is the cable hammer curl using a rope
attachment or a reverse cable curl using an
EZ bar attachment.
Now, I prefer these variations because they
give you more consistent tension on the muscle.
And when I compare them to the free-weight
variations, I definitely feel a stronger contraction
in that brachioradialis muscle.
So, first off, this is the cable hammer curl.
It’s a pretty basic exercise overall.
Not a lot different from a basic curl, except
again, you’re going to keep your wrists
in that neutral position.
So, just take a step back from the machine,
keep a slight bend in your knees, and then
curl the rope up until you feel a full contraction
in the brachioradialis before lowering the
weight back down.
And just like with regular bicep curls, you
can increase the range of motion by making
sure to flex your triceps at the bottom of
each rep.
And also make sure to keep your elbows and
your shoulders relatively stationary, rather
than allowing them to drift forward throughout
the exercise.
If you allow them to drift forward, then the
front delts become a lot more involved in
the exercise.
And then after that, this is the reverse cable
curl.
And I like to use an EZ curl bar attachment
here, again, because I find that it is easier
on the wrists.
If you do want to use a straight bar attachment,
that’s fine.
But give the EZ curl bar variation a try first,
if you do have an EZ curl bar available.
So, again, same basic form here.
Take a step back, slight bend in the knees,
elbows and shoulders stationary, flexing your
triceps at the bottom of each rep.
And then just performing a regular curling
motion, except again, the main difference
is that your palms are going to be facing
down rather than up.
Now, if you’re still a relative beginner,
then including specific brachioradialis exercise
is probably isn’t necessary at this point.
You can if you want.
But I would recommend that you put the majority
of your focus just on building overall muscle
size and strength.
And then if you want to fine-tune things later
on, you can include these exercises at that
time.
But these exercises are useful for those who
do have a reasonable amount of training experience.
But still find that you have lagging forearms
that you want to build up.
Or again, as I mentioned just for people who
specifically are concerned with building bigger
forearms and focusing in on that area.
Guys, if you found this information helpful,
and you want to get a complete step-by-step
roadmap for maximizing your muscle size and
strength gains in the most efficient way,
then make sure to check out my complete body
transformation blueprint system over at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
If you found this information helpful, make
sure to like the video, leave a comment, subscribe
to stay up-to-date and share the video as
well.
And you can also check out my official website
over at Seannal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you guys again soon.