Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and today I wanted to answer a really common
question that people ask, which is how to
consistently progress in weight on smaller
isolation exercises.
They’ll say things like, you know, “obviously
you can’t just keep adding 5 pounds every
few weeks to exercises like side lateral raises
or bicep curls, so how am I supposed to achieve
progressive overload on those exercises”.
So, this is a good question to ask, but as
far as I’m concerned there’s really no
big difference between the basic concept of
progression when it comes to small isolation
exercises in comparison to big compound lifts,
your primary focus is still to just gradually
increase the weight that you use over time,
and assuming that you’re training and eating
properly, you should be able to achieve consistent,
ongoing progress as long as you continue training.
However, there are two very important things
to keep in mind here.
First off, an isolation exercise only involves
the use of one single muscle group and so
obviously the overall rate of progression
is going to be a lot slower and more gradual,
and because all of the stress from those exercises
is being directed at just one muscle group,
small increases are still going to be very
significant.
I can’t give a direct parallel here, but
for example, you could say something like,
maybe 2 extra reps on a tricep extension is
going to benefit your triceps in the same
way that 5 extra pounds on a deadlift would
benefit your back and legs.
So you really have to lower your expectation
for how quickly those isolation exercises
are going to increase in weight and recognize
that any progression at all, even if it’s
just a single rep or even half a rep, that
still is significant, again because you’re
only using 1 single muscle group.
And the second thing to remember is that any
time you increase the weight on an isolation
exercise, you’re going to feel that increase
way more heavily because it’s a much bigger
percentage jump in comparison to increasing
the weight on a compound exercise.
For example, if you’re performing side lateral
raises with 20 pound dumbbells and then you
increase to 22.5 pound dumbbells, you’re
increasing the total weight lifted by 5 pounds
which is actually a 25% increase, whereas
if you were performing deadlifts with 200
pounds and then you added 5 pounds, the increase
there would only be 2.5% which is 10 times
less.
So let me give you a couple of tips on this
particular issue.
First off, if jumping up to the next set of
weights on an isolation exercise feels too
heavy for you, then what you want to do is
focus on increasing the number of reps that
you’re performing first and foremost before
you try to go ahead and add more weight.
So instead of trying to increase the weight
on for example a dumbbell curl once you reached
maybe 8 reps with a certain weight, try bumping
that up to 10 reps or even 12 reps, and then
increase the weight from there.
Or if you get to 10 reps on a side lateral
raise and you try to increase the weight but
it feels too heavy, then bump that up to 12
reps or even 15 reps before increasing.
Another option that you can use to get stronger
with a given weight before going up is to
decrease the rest time in between sets, or
to just make the exercise itself more difficult
by pausing for a longer timein the fully contracted
position, slowing down your negatives or just
adding some more volume by performing an extra
set or two.
And one more point that I’d add here is
the concept of “microloading”, which is
to try and find ways to decrease the overall
amount of weight that you add each time so
that the percentage jump isn’t as big.
For example if you’re performing a machine
isolation lift but the weight stack only goes
up by 10 or 15 pound increments at a time,
then depending on the machine you could rest
a small dumbbell on top of the weight stack,
or you could even hang a 2.5 pound or a 5
pound plate off the pin like you see here,
this is something that I personally do all
the time.
Or with dumbbells you can actually purchase
small magnetic micro plates that attach onto
the ends of the dumbbells, or you could even
wear really light wrist weights depending
on which exercise you're performing, these
are just some ideas to play around with, and
if you get creative then there are all sorts
of different ways that you can increase the
weight on isolation lifts by only 2.5 pounds
at a time as opposed to 5 or 10 pounds.
So, bottom line here, progressive overload
is the single most important factor when it
comes to gaining muscle size and strength
over time, and you should strive for continual
progression on small isolation lifts in the
same way you do for compound lifts, except
that the increases are going to happen a lot
more slowly, and that’s totally fine because
even small increases on isolation exercises
are still very significant in terms of gaining
muscle size and strength because you’re
only utilizing a single muscle group.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more no nonsense, science based training
tips just like this one along with nutrition
and supplementation information to maximize
your muscle building and your fat burning
progress, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.