Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of EliteImpactLabs.com
with another bodybuilding video lesson for
you and today I want to discuss the topic
of creatine cycling and whether or not it's
necessary to periodically cycle on and off
with your creatine supplementation.
So there's no single agreed upon method when
it comes to creatine cycling but it basically
involves a period of extended daily creatine
use followed by an "off" period where no creatine
is used at all and that cycle is then repeated
over and over again.
So this could involve a schedule of 8 weeks
on followed by 2 weeks off, or 12 weeks on
followed by 4 weeks off, just to give a couple
of examples.
So, do you need to cycle your creatine?
Well a creatine cycle is not going to hurt
you but the truth is that it's really just
unnecessary and it's kind of just a waste
of your effort and your focus.
There are 3 main reasons why some people will
perform a creatine cycle.
The first is to ensure that their body's natural
production of creatine remains elevated.
The truth here is that there is no evidence
to suggest that exogenous creatine supplementation
causes any significant or long lasting drop
in natural creatine production when supplementation
ceases.
And that's because the enzymatic system that
is involved with regulating creatine production
is extremely sensitive and it adjusts very
quickly to increases and decreases in external
creatine consumption.
Reason #2 is to prevent any possible adverse
health effects, particularly on the liver
and the kidneys.
Now the truth here is that creatine is backed
by endless studies, it's the most studied
sport supplement in history and it's always
been shown to be completely safe in both the
short and the long term with no adverse affects
on kidney or liver function ever demonstrated.
So cycling off of creatine in order to "give
your body a rest" is completely unnecessary.
And the final reason is to maximize the overall
effectiveness of the creatine supplementation.
Alot of users will claim that they get better
results by following a creatine cycle, but
this can really be chalked up to nothing more
than just a basic placebo effect.
I mean, obviously when creatine levels are
depleted and then re-saturated it's going
to appear as if there are "new gains" showing
up, but this is nothing more than the natural
water retention and the strength increases
that are produced as the creatine levels gradually
build up in the muscle tissue following the
"off" period.
The only goal when it comes to creatine supplementation
is to achieve full saturation of your muscle
tissue and once that has been accomplished,
that creatine is then available for use any
time you need it during your workout and there
is a finite limit as to how much creatine
can be stored in your muscles so cycling on
and off is not going to give you any super
benefits or super saturated tissue in order
to give you better gains.
So the bottom line here is pretty simple.
With creatine dosing just take 3 to 5 grams
of high quality mono, monohydrate powder once
a day, at any time when it is most convenient
and mixed with whatever liquid you want.
It's really as easy as that and there's no
need to complicate it any further.
If you do want to check out a very high quality
creatine monohydrate supplement that also
includes beta-alanine as well as a couple
of other ingredients you check out our MuscleAmp
formula using the link in the description
box below.
If you did find the information in this video
useful as always please make sure to hit the
Like button, leave a comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Also make sure to join us over on Facebook
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
I'm doing this outro backwards, and also grab
your 28 day Mass Building Plan using the link
in the description box below which includes
a free workout plan, meal plan and supplement
guide.
Thanks again for watching this video and I
will talk to you again soon with more free
tips.