Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And in this video, I just want to discuss
creatine ethyl ester and how it compares to
regular creatine monohydrate for increasing
muscle growth, gym performance and overall
strength. So, ever since creatine monohydrate
became a popular bodybuilding supplement back
in the 1990's, a whole slew of high tech,
and new and improved forms of creatine have
popped up with creatine ethyl ester being
one of the top sellers. And the makers of
the ethyl ester form claim that it's more
absorbable, that it's better utilized and
then it's less likely to be converted into
the waste product creatinine than standard
creatine monohydrate is. They also point to
several problems associated with creatine
monohydrate use saying that it causes bloating,
stomach discomfort and then it's not a stable
form of creatine. And of course as you can
guess that creatine ethyl ester solves all
of these problems. So, what is the real deal
here? Well, first of all, standard creatine
monohydrate does not cause any of the problems
that the makers of any of these breakthrough
forms of creatine claim that it does. Creatine
monohydrate does not cause any type of bloating
or stomach discomfort when used within the
recommended 3gram to 5gram per day dosage.
And the idea that creatine monohydrate is
unstable is also complete nonsense. The effectiveness,
the safety and the stability of creatine monohydrate
have been confirmed over and over again through
endless piles of research because it's actually
the most studied sports supplement currently
on the market. And secondly, we actually now
have concrete research available that actually
demonstrates that creatine ethyl ester is
actually inferior to creatine monohydrate
in a few important ways. And I'll provide
a link to that research in the description
box below. And if you're interested you can
read it in more detail for yourself. But just
to sum up the conclusion of that study, creatine
ethyl ester did not show any additional benefit
to increase muscle strength or performance
than creatine monohydrate or a maltodextrose
placebo. Since creatine ethyl ester supplementation
showed a large increase in serum creatinine
levels throughout the study with no significant
increase in serum and total muscle creatine
content, it can be concluded that a large
portion of the creatine ethyl ester was being
degraded within the GI tract after ingestion.
So what this study shows is that creatine
ethyl ester is actually less stable than
creatine monohydrate. And then it's converted
into the waste product creatinine at a much
faster rate. Creatine monohydrate on the other
hand, has a bioavailability of nearly 100%,
meaning that the body will absorb pretty much
all of it. Not only that, but creatine ethyl
ester was also shown to be more likely to
cause subcutaneous water retention or bloating.
The increased water retention that you get
from creatine monohydrate is stored inside
the actual muscle cell, while creatine ethyl
ester pushes more water outside of the cell
and directly underneath the skin. So, the
fact here is pretty simple, there isn't a
single bit of empirical evidence that shows
creatine ethyl ester to be superior to monohydrate
in any way. And the research that does exist
shows the exact opposite. Now, more research
could definitely be done here. But at this
point creatine ethyl ester really has nothing
going for it. And to top it all off, it's
about three times more expensive on a gram-for-gram
basis than standard creatine monohydrate.
So, if you want to pay three times more for
a type of creatine that has been demonstrated
to be inferior and less efficient, then go
with the ethyl ester form. But if you want
to base your supplement choices on actual
science, and the logic and save some money
while you're at it, stick with standard micronized
creatine monohydrate. So, thanks for watching
this video lesson. I hope you found it useful.
If you do want to check out a very high quality
creatine monohydrate based supplement, you
can check out our Muscle Amp formula using
the link in the description box below. If
you did enjoy the video, please make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up-to-date on future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, the link for that is also in
the description box. That includes a free
workout plan, meal plan and supplement guide.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook,
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways. Thanks again
for watching. And I'll talk to you again soon
with more free tips.