Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I'm going to be doing a
quick review of Mike Chang's Afterburn Fuel
Pre-Workout Product, otherwise known of course
as "Mike's Magic Red Drink".
So you've probably seen the ads for this particular
supplement plastered in every corner of the
web just like I have, but what is the real
truth when it comes to Afterburn Fuel?
Is this a well formulated and worthwhile supplement,
and is it worth the price?
So you can find hundreds of other reviews
online for this product by simply running
a basic Google or YouTube search, but what
most people don’t realize here is that almost
all of the reviews and write-ups that you
find for this product are NOT actually written
by knowledgeable, credible fitness experts.
They’re written by affiliate marketers who
are promoting the product in order to earn
commissions through their referral link, and
this is why virtually every single Afterburn
Fuel review that you find online portrays
it in such a positive light, and it's also
why the link that sends you over to the website
to buy the product almost always contains
an affiliate ID.
In most cases, it’s really nothing more
than a sales pitch, and this is true for a
large percentage of online supplement reviews
out there and is definitely not limited to
this product only.
So in this video you're going to be getting
a real, no B.S review from someone who is
actually knowledgeable in this area and who
has zero vested interest in this product or
in any other specific supplement brands.
So whether or not you buy this product makes
absolutely no difference whatsoever to me.
All I’m offering you here is my dead-honest
opinion based on the available evidence.
Now I don't want to ramble on here for 20
minutes or more so I'm going to attempt to
keep this as concise as I can.
Okay so right off the bat, there is a very
basic, fundamental problem with Afterburn
Fuel and that is that there’s no way for
you to know what’s actually in it, and this
is because, like many other popular bodybuilding
and fitness supplements out there, all of
the specific ingredient amounts are hidden
behind a proprietary blend.
In other words, the scientists at the “Afterburn
Fuel Research Center” (and yes, the sales
page over on Mike Chang’s website claims
that this is actually a real place) they're
willing to tell you which ingredients are
included in the product, but they're not willing
to tell you the specific dosages for each
one.
Instead, all you get is the total amount of
all the ingredients combined.
Now when it comes to choosing an effective
pre-workout supplement (or any supplement
for that matter), proper dosing is absolutely
critical.
It makes no difference whatsoever how great
the specific ingredients included are unless
you’re receiving a proper study-validated
amount of each one.
So honestly, on that basis alone I would personally
never purchase this supplement and I would
never recommend it to anybody else either.
There’s just no good, viable reason for
ingredient dosages to be hidden behind a proprietary
blend, ever.
It doesn’t actually prevent other companies
from finding out what’s in your product
(and this is the basic principle behind what
a proprietary blend is supposed to be used
for) because a simple lab analysis can easily
tell you that.
So, what do supplement companies actually
use proprietary blends for?
Well, I’m not saying that this is the specific
reason why Afterburn Fuel uses a proprietary
blend, but in almost all OTHER cases, it’s
simply done to cut down production costs by
allowing the company to intentionally under-dose
a certain percentage of the ingredients with
the understanding that the average supplement-buyer
isn't going to know the difference either
way.
In any case, if I’m going to be ingesting
a combination of 17 different ingredients
into my body (and this is the specific amount
that is included in Afterburn Fuel) I sure
as hell want to know how much of each ingredient
that I’m getting.
Okay, so moving on.
Afterburn Fuel is separated into 2 different
proprietary blends: the “Get Jacked Matrix”
(and yes, this is the actual name) and the
“Cognitive Energy Matrix”.
So I'm just going to point out some very basic
things about each one here.
So first off is the "Get Jacked Matrix".
So always keep in mind that the ingredients
in a proprietary blend are listed on the label
from the most prominent to least prominent,
so with that in mind, we know that Creatinol
O-Phosphate is the primary compound in this
blend.
Now why they would use this as the main ingredient,
I honestly have no idea.
This is not the same thing as creatine, and
most of the research that was done on this
compound is a few decades old and it primarily
studied its effects as a cardio-protective
drug.
On top of that, the studies were done using
direct injections into the muscle rather than
oral consumption, so it’s not even known
at this point whether or not this compound
is bio-available in humans when it's consumed
orally or what its specific effects would
be.The second most prominent ingredient is
L-Arginine AKG.
This compound is usually consumed for its
supposed effects on raising nitric oxide levels
in the body, leading to improvements in endurance,
and work output and overall recovery.
Unfortunately, the research on L-Arginine
AKG for this purpose is very weak, with many
studies showing no benefits at all, and this
is probably because l-arginine is poorly absorbed
by the intestines and a large portion of it
doesn’t even make it into your bloodstream
in the first place.
After that we have Agmatine Sulfate.
This another so-called “nitric oxide booster”
with very little available data on its effects
in humans, and for the small number of studies
that have been conducted, those also used
direct injections rather than oral consumption.
Three ingredients that are included in the
“Get Jacked” blend that are scientifically
supported and that I do stand behind and recommend
are creatine, beta alanine and citrulline
malate.
Creatine and beta alanine supplements have
both been very reliably demonstrated in the
research to increase muscular strength and
endurance, while citrulline malate has been
shown to improve overall ATP production and
blood flow to working muscles.
However, there are still two important issues
here.
First off, creatine and beta alanine do NOT
have immediate, acute effects on strength
and performance and aren’t actually “pre
workout” ingredients at all.
The benefits that you achieve from these two
compounds is a result of consistent daily
supplementation over the long term, and taking
creatine and beta alanine immediately before
a workout is not going to give you any direct
effects.
Now this is not necessarily a bad thing however,
because mixing these two ingredients into
your pre-workout is still fine as a matter
of convenience.
The other, and much more serious problem,
however, is that the “Get Jacked Matrix”
only provides 7 and a half grams of total
active ingredients per serving.
So if you simply take a look at the research
studied dosages for each of the compounds
that are includedin the blend, it’s very
clear to see that this is not providing you
NEARLY enough in order for all of the ingredients,
or even a reasonable portion of the ingredients
to be properly dosed.
So here are the study-validated doses for
just half of the ingredients that are included
here.
Creatinol O-Phosphate is around 3 grams, L-Arginine
AKG, 3 to 6 grams, Beta Alanine, 2.4 to 6.4
grams, Creatine, 3 to 5 grams and Citrulline
Malate, 6 to 8 grams.
And that means that this blend would have
to provide you with around 17 – 22 grams
of total active ingredients in order to deliver
the actual doses of each of these compounds
that was used in the research.
And even that’s not true – it would have
to be even higher than this, because I didn’t
even include the other half of the ingredients
found in the product in those totals.
So all in all, this blend gets a huge thumbs
down.
It consists primarily of ingredients with
no reliable research to support their effects,
and it is clearly under-dosed in a big way.
So next up is the "Cognitive Energy" Matrix.
This blend consists of 7 different ingredients
that are designed to increase energy levels
and mental focus during your workouts.
So in terms of overall ingredient selection,
this blend actually starts off really well
with three compounds that I am a big fan of
and that do work very effectively for these
purposes: Acetyl L-Carnitine, L-Tyrosine and
Caffeine.
Unfortunately, it basically all goes down
the tubes yet again when you simply look at
the total gram amount of the blend that is
included which is 1.6 grams.
The study dosage for acetyl l-carnitine is
between half a gram up to 2 and a half grams,
l-tyrosine is around half a gram up to 3 grams
or more, and caffeine is going to land anywhere
between 100 to 400 milligrams.
So when you consider that the total gram amount
given here is only 1.6 grams, and that there
are still four other ingredients included
in this blend beyond the 3 I just mentioned,
it’s clear to see that in the very BEST
case scenario you’d still only be getting
the absolute bare minimum dosage here.
And based on that alone I really don’t see
any need to go further on this portion of
the product.
You're getting a few decent ingredients here,
but based on the total amount that is included
in the blend, which is 1.6 grams, it’s just
not possible that they would be present in
significantly usable dosages.
The exception here is caffeine, which I will
address shortly.
Now, what about the price?
Well it should be clear at this point that
I am strongly NOT in favor of the overall
formula that's being used here, but on top
of that, Afterburn Fuel is actually one of
the most expensive pre-workouts on the market
as well at an absolutely insane, offensive
price of 67 dollars per bottle.
To think that people are actually spending
67 dollars a month on this stuff is honestly
just crazy, especially considering that you
can easily make your own far more potent blend
for a tiny fraction of that cost.
67 bucks a month would be a massive amount
to spend on a pre-workout even if it was well
formulated, and you'd be far better off spending
your money on things like chicken breasts
and whey protein and oatmeal instead.
Not only that, but unless you read the tiny
fine-print on the Afterburn Fuel website when
you make your purchase, you might not realize
that you are actually signing up for a monthly
subscription program that automatically bills
your credit card every single month unless
you call the 1-800 number to cancel.
Now I know that some people will find this
video and say "Sean, you don't know what you're
talking about, I used Afterburn Fuel, and
it really worked well for me.”
Well, aside from the basic placebo effect
that you experience whenever you take a product
with the positive expectation that it's going
to work well, and trust me, this is WAY more
powerful than you might think, there’s also
a far simpler reason why you might have used
Afterburn Fuel and felt good about the results
it gave you, and that is because just like
virtually every other popular pre-workout
supplement and energy drink out there, it
contains caffeine.
Not only is caffeine dirt-cheap, but it’s
also the single most powerful pre-workout
supplement available by far and will have
the most dramatic effects of ANY ingredient
included in ANY product out there designed
to be taken before your workouts.
So, as long as there is caffeine in there,
then yes, the product will “work”, but
that doesn't mean that the product as a whole
is well-formulated, or that the other ingredients
are contributing to the overall effects in
a significant way, or that it’s worth spending
67 dollars a month on.
So, what's the bottom line on Afterburn Fuel?
Not only is it laughably over-hyped in classic
Mike Chang style, but it’s also poorly formulated,
it's under-dosed and it's hugely over-priced.
So if for some reason you are a Mike Chang
fan who feels the desire to contribute a personal
donation to his bank account so that we can
all continue to be bombarded by his annoying
ads and videos on a daily basis, then by all
means, buy this product.
However, if you’re actually looking for
an effective, scientifically supported pre-workout
that is going to safely enhance your training
performance, and for a reasonable price, then
leave this stuff on the shelf at the “Afterburn
Fuel Research Center” and just make your
own homemade blend instead.
To learn about a basic pre-workout that will
deliver the exact effects that you need for
less than 5 bucks a month you can click here
or check the link in the description box below
for a post over on my website that discusses
exactly that, or if you want something a little
bit more comprehensive but still simple and
inexpensive then you can check out my free
fitness supplementation guide which I'll also
link in the description box below and just
scroll to the “Pre-Workout” section for
more information.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found this review useful.
If you did, please make sure to hit the "like"
button, leave a comment and subscribe to stay
up to date on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
the icon at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below.
Talk to you again soon.