What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com - www.RealScienceAhletics.com,
and in this video today I want to talk about
the 80/20 rule.
It's also known as the Pareto principle.
You might have heard of it before, but basically
what it states is that 20% of your actions
in a given area are ultimately going to be
responsible for producing 80% of the overall
results, and then the other 80% of your actions
are gonna produce the remaining 20% of results.
So, in other words if you're trying to reach
a certain goal, the vast majority of your
results are ultimately gonna come from a small
group of key things that you do on a consistent
basis.
Now, this is taught pretty often when it comes
to business but the same idea also holds true
for building muscle and losing fat.
Now, one of the big issues I see nowadays
is that because fitness in general has just
become so huge, you know, here on YouTube,
social media, blogs, there's just so much
conflicting information out there that people
have to shift through and process.
And so many of these content creators are
just pumping out this constant fluff and BS
to try and be unique, and to stand out, and
to try to build up their following that way.
There's all these different dieting strategies,
special training techniques, breakthrough
supplements, ideas about certain foods that
you must eat or you must avoid, exercises
you must do or you must avoid, it just goes
on and on and on, and because of that it's
really easy to get distracted and to lose
sight of what's really important in the big
picture.
This constant information overload can sometimes
give you the impression that getting into
shape is this hugely complex process with
a million different variables that you have
to figure out and juggle, when in reality
coming back to the Pareto principle, 80% of
the overall muscle building results you achieve,
80% of the fat you lose and the strength you
gain is ultimately going to come as a result
of applying 20% of all the possible things
that you could do that are being taught and
preached about online.
And that's obviously just an estimate, it
could be 85/15, it could be 90/10, but the
bottom line is to keep in mind that no matter
what, no matter what anyone tries to tell
you or how convinced it might seem, the vast
majority of your progress is going to come
down to the basic fundamentals.
There's just no way around it.
There's no special unknown secret waiting
around the corner, that all of a sudden gonna
make a world of difference and double or triple
your progress overnight, or turn the whole
process into some easy walk in the park.
It's the underlying fundamentals applied consistently
over the long term that are going to make
the real difference.
Now, I'm talking about simple things; are
you training with a high enough level of intensity
in the gym, are you training with proper form
and centering your workouts around the basic
compound lifts, are you hitting each muscle
with enough total volume and frequency throughout
the week, are you striving for progressive
overload and getting stronger over time, are
you hitting your overall calorie needs and
your approximate macronutrient needs for the
day.
I know none of this stuff sounds very exciting,
it doesn't sound very glamorous, it's not
gonna sell programs or supplements as effectively
as claiming that there's some special shortcut
you can use instead, but this is the basic
stuff that most of your fitness journey will
boil down to if you want to be successful.
If you train hard with proper form and you
get consistently stronger on the basic compound
lifts using enough total volume and frequency,
and you support that with the proper amount
of total calories and macronutrients throughout
the week, and let's also throw in that you
stay hydrated and you get a proper sleep each
night, those are important, too, a few basic
supplements if they fit into your goals, if
you just do those things on a consistent basis,
even if you never even think about anything
else you'll still probably achieve, I'd say
80% or more of your total genetic potential
when it comes to gaining muscle and leaning
down, and probably within about 2 to 3 years
or so if you're mostly consistent along the
way.
Now, obviously there are additional details
associated with those basic things.
I'm not trying to oversimplify things here.
You have to learn how to train with proper
form on each exercise, you have to learn how
to calculate your volume and frequency and
lay out a solid weekly training split, how
to apply progressive overload, how to determine
your calories and your macros and track your
progress along the way.
I wrote an entire book on these things that
lays it all out step-by-step and I wouldn't
have written all that if I didn't think that
explaining it all in detail was necessary.
But once you do break it all down you'll see
that it really isn't that complicated and
it really doesn't take a long time to learn
either if you commit yourself to it.
So, I'm not saying that getting into great
shape is easy and even once you do have the
right knowledge in place, it still takes time
to get the hang of everything and build up
the proper habits, and learn about your body
and how it responds, and things like that,
but what I am saying is that for the most
part it really isn't that complicated.
It doesn't require anything fancy and if you
keep the majority of your focus on the basic
fundamentals and just get really good at applying
those few key things, not only are you gonna
get way better results in comparison to trying
to do a hundred different things at once,
but it's also gonna simplify everything for
you mentally, which will increase the chances
that you'll actually stick to your program
for the long term.
And it'll also free up time and energy that
you can then go ahead and divert on to other
things.
The smaller details do become increasingly
important as you reach the more advanced stages
of lifting, and if it's your goal to take
your physique to the highest possible level,
but for the average natural lifter, again,
the bulk of your results are just gonna come
down to the simple fundamental tasks carried
out consistently over the long term.
And that's where the majority of your focus
should be in order to maximize your chances
for success.
So, I hope this was helpful, guys.
Like I mentioned before, having access to
the proper information is a critical part
of getting those fundamentals down as efficiently
as possible because there's just so much misleading
content out there nowadays.
So if you do want to cut through all the nonsense
and grab a fully structured step-by-step plan
that lays out everything you need to know
in terms of training, nutrition and supplementation
using an honest science-based approach, I'd
recommend checking out my Body Transformation
Blueprint program by clicking up at the top
of the screen or visiting www.BTBluePrint.com,
because that's definitely a resource that
I wish I would’ve had when I first started
lifting.
If you did enjoy the video make sure to hit
the like button, leave a comment, and subscribe
below if you haven't already, to stay up to
date on future videos.
And you can also follow me on Instagram and
Facebook as well for more daily tips and updates,
the links for that are also below.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.