It's 3am, what are you doing
3am, exactly. The best time to workout.
 
The time your muscles don't expect it.  
Muscle confusion baby.
The only thing confused here is you.
Is training in the evening hours superior 
to morning hours for muscle hypertrophy?
Some have suggested this 
based on various evidence.
Three long-term studies are commonly 
referenced. Kussman et al. found 50% more  
muscle growth with evening (4:30-8pm) 
versus morning training (6:30-10am).
Another Saliek et al. study found 
higher percentages of muscle growth  
in an evening (5-7pm) versus 
morning training group (7-9am).
Finally, Schett found greater fat-free mass 
gains in bodybuilders who trained in the evening  
(after 6pm) versus morning hours (before 10am).
Besides these three long-term studies, 
mechanistic hypotheses are also put forth.
The testosterone to cortisol 
ratio is higher in the evening,  
perhaps suggesting a more favorable 
hormonal environment for building muscle.
Untrained individuals also tend to 
be stronger in the evening hours.  
This study found peak strength levels at 6pm.
Factors like as greater 
hydration, glycogen stores,  
and higher core body temperature likely 
explain this greater evening strength.
Collectively, all this mentioned 
data may have you believe evening  
training is definitively superior 
to morning training for hypertrophy.
But, I'm not truly convinced 
this conclusion can be made.
Let's dive into why.
Addressing the mechanistic data first, 
an elevated testosterone to cortisol  
ratio means little to nothing for 
hypertrophy in all likelihood.
Alterations in various hormones within a  
normal healthy range likely do 
not mean much for hypertrophy.
As for greater strength levels in the evening,  
notice how I said this was the 
case for untrained individuals.
I made this distinction because you train 
yourself consistently in the morning,  
guess what ends up happening?
Your body adapts and you end up being comparably 
strong in the morning and evening hours.
This is what a 2019 meta-analysis by Grgic et 
al., based on 7 studies (verify this) established.
At this point, you may be thinking 
"okay, but what about the 3 long-term  
studies finding superior muscle growth 
with evening versus morning training?"
Starting with the Schett study that found greater 
fat-free mass gains in bodybuilders with evening  
(after 6pm) versus morning workouts (before 10am),  
this study was never actually 
peer-reviewed or published.
This study can only be found detailed in a blog.
As detailed in this blog,  
Schett presented the findings at a 
conference in Las Vagas, Nevada in 2005.
This begs the question, why was the study 
never peer-reviewed and officially published?
I have no idea, but because it wasn't  
we simply cannot take this study 
as legitimate and real evidence.
Progressing on, we noted a study by 
Saliek et al. finding higher muscle  
growth percentage gains with evening 
(5-7pm) versus morning training (7-9am).
Specifically, quadriceps volume 
increased by 3.5% for the evening group  
and 2.7% for the morning group.
The issue is this 0.8% difference between 
groups was not statistically significant.
What this means is we cannot this 0.8% difference 
is a result of evening training being superior,  
rather it could just be random chance.
For example, the evening group could 
just have had subjects with slighly  
better muscle building genetics. After 
all, there were only 9 subjects in the  
morning training group and 7 
in the evening training group.
As for the Kuusman study, which found more 50% 
more muscle growth with evening versus morning  
training, it's worth briefly overviewing 
it to get a scope of its limitations.
42 previously untrained men were recruited 
and assigned into one of four groups:
Group one trained in the 
morning hours (6:30-10am),  
and lifting weights before performing cardio.
Group two also trained in the morning hours, but 
they performed cardio before lifting weights.
Group three trained in the 
evening hours (4:30-8pm),  
lifting weights before performing cardio.
Group four also trained in the evening hours, 
but performed cardio before lifting weights.
The weight training consisted of a range of 
free weight and machine exercises, while the  
cardio was performed on a cycling machine. 
Training was performed 2-3 times per week.
Before the study, at the 12th week (mid-point 
of the study), and after the 24 weeks,  
vastus lateralis cross-sectional area 
at 50% of the thigh bone was measured.  
This was an indicator of muscle growth.
By the 12th week (mid-point of the study), 
growth was similar between all four groups.
However, by the 24th week, increases were greater  
for the two groups training in the evening 
than the two groups training in the morning.
Perhaps this study indicates 
that in the longer term  
(beyond 12 weeks) training in the evening 
becomes more favorable for muscle hypertrophy.
Yet, it's important to remember this is 
the only official published study to date  
finding a statistically significant 
effect of morning versus evening training.
One study can never be definitive 
evidence. Let me use an example.
This Kuusman study also found 
that after the 24 training weeks,  
increases in leg press one-rep max were similar 
between all four of the training groups.
As the groups differed in the order they performed 
weight training and cardio in a session, and all  
groups ultimately experienced similar one-rep max 
gains, this study would have you believe that it  
does not matter if you perform weight training 
or cardio first in a session for strength.
However, a meta-analysis by Eddens et al. combined  
9 other studies and found 
for increasing one-rep max,  
lifting weights first and then performing cardio 
in a session is better than the reverse of this.
The point I'm making is future 
research could contradict the  
hypertrophy findings of this Kuusman study.
Aside from the Saliek and Kuusman studies, 
3 other studies have compared morning versus  
evening training for measures of
uscle growth.
These 3 studies lasted 12 weeks 
or less and found no statistical  
difference in muscle growth measurements 
between morning and evening training.
When combining these three studies with 
the Saliek and Kuusman into a meta-analysis  
(which increases statistical power), as 
done by Grgic et al. in 2019, there was  
no significant difference in muscle growth 
between training in the morning and evening.
Now, again, the Kuusman et al. study was 
the only study lasting longer than 12 weeks,  
potentially indicating a benefit of 
evening training for hypertrophy long-term.  
But we've already established why we should be 
cautious of findings from a mere single study.
By no means am I definitively 
saying evening training is not  
superior to morning training for muscle growth.
What I'm saying is the current data 
isn't convincing enough to say this.
Future research is needed.
For the time being, the majority of 
evidence indicates during 12 weeks or less,  
training in the morning is similar 
to the evening for hypertrophy.
Moreover, as for strength gains, Grgic et 
al. found when averaging out strength tests  
performed in the morning and evening 
hours, there was no difference in  
gains between subjects that trained in the 
morning or evening hours. In other words,  
training in the morning or evening hours seems 
to produce a similar magnitude of strength gains.
Ultimately, consistent training and adherence are 
paramount for making gains, so I think it's best  
to conclude individuals should train at a time 
that suits their schedule and life circumstances.