What’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and this here is a pretty common question
that I get, which is: What should you do if
you go over on your calories for a particular
day?
Can you make it up the next day or should
you just not worry about it and just get back
on track with your diet as normal?
And the answer that I would give is that either
of those options are actually fine.
And you can just choose either one depending
on what fits your goals and what fits your
overall mindset best.
So, the first option is to make up for it
the next day.
There’s really nothing particularly special
about the timeframe of twenty-four hours,
and it’s not as if your calorie intake has
to be a hundred percent set in stone within
each of those twenty-four hours blocks.
If your daily calorie target was 2,000 calories
it’s not going to make a difference in the
big picture if, you know, one day you eat
2,300 calories and then the next day you eat
1,700 calories.
It’s more so about your average calorie
intake over the course of a few days or a
week.
I would recommend making an effort to keep
it relatively steady.
You know, I wouldn’t recommend that you
eat, say 800 calories for five days in a row
and then you ate a thousand calories in a
single day, but if there’s just sort of
modest ebb and flow to your intake, a few
bigger up and down spikes here and there then
that’s completely fine and it’s to be
expected actually.
So if you went over by 500 calories one day,
then yeah, you can just eat 500 calories less
the following day or 250 calories less for
the following two days.
It’s really not going to make a difference.
So, option one; just take whatever you went
over by and adjust your calories over the
next day or two in order to balance everything
out.
And then option number two, which is probably
the better option in most average cases in
my opinion, is to just accept the fact that
you over ate.
Don’t stress out about it and just get back
on track with your regular diet as normal.
Remember that fat loss and fat gain are both
very slow processes than happened gradually
over the long term, and going over on your
calories for one or two days really isn’t
going to make much of a difference at all
in the big picture.
I mean if your calorie target for fat loss
was 2,000 and you ate 2,500 on a particular
day, I mean that’s nothing, you’re pretty
much just eating at your maintenance level,
and so you’re not going to gain fat from
that.
At worst you could just consider it a wash
and just move on to the next day.
Even if you ate, say an extra thousand calories
that would still equal out to maybe only about
a 500 calories surplus, which is hardly anything
on its own.
Remember that just a single pound of stored
fat contains about 3,500 calories.
And not only that, but it’s not even as
if all the calories that you over eat is being
stored as fat anyway.
Because if your weight training is part of
your fat loss plan, which I assume you are,
then you have a muscle growth stimulus in
place from that training.
And as result of that several hundred of the
extra calories that you eat on any given day
are actually going to be diverted to muscle
growth.
So that’s the second option.
Just accept that you’re human, your diet’s
not going to be perfect.
You’re going to have days where you’re
over eat.
That’s normal.
It’s to be expected.
And just get back on track with your normal
calorie deficit the following day and just
keep moving forward from there.
So either of these two options are fine, and
you can just choose the one that keeps you
the most motivated and the one that’s the
most in line with your goals.
If you’re trying to lose a very specific
amount of fat and get into a certain shape
within a set time frame then option one might
be more suitable to make sure that you reach
your goals in time.
On the other hand, if you’re just following
a general fat loss program with no time constrains
then option one might make more sense for
you.
Also keep in mind that if your weight suddenly
shoots up the day after you “cheat” on
your diet, most of that if not all of it is
just being caused by an increase in water
retention from the added carbs and sodium.
And it’s not being caused by actual fat
gain.
Your body might also appear a bit softer and
puffier looking, but again this is just water
retention and it’s going to return back
to normal within a day or two of getting back
on your regular diet.
So guys, if you found this advice helpful
and you want to get all the tools that you
need to lose fat and build muscle as effectively
as possible including step-by-step meal plans,
workouts, supplement guides and one-on-one
coaching then you can download my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by heading over
to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com using the
link in the description box.
Make sure to follow me on social media here
if aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, share, comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.