What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, Sean.Nal.com,
RealScienceAthletics.com, and I wanted to
do a video on this subject because now that
I'm a lot more active on Instagram, make sure
to follow me there if you aren't already by
the way.
I've been posting a ton of useful tips and
updates that you'll get a lot of value from.
It's @sean_nalewanyj, but now that I'm more
active there, I've been seeing a lot of these
health and fitness posts lately talking about
how the scale doesn't matter.
People saying, "Throw the scale out, forget
the scale.
You don't need the scale, the scale doesn't
define you, it's just a number."
All this kind of stuff.
And I do understand some of the motivation
behind that because completely obsessing over
the scale is definitely not a wise idea and
it can lead to unnecessary stress and worry
if you take it too far.
But for someone who is actively trying to
lose fat or gain muscle, this can actually
be pretty bad advice.
No, the scale isn't everything.
No, you shouldn't obsess over it.
You shouldn't tie your whole self-worth as
a person to the number on the scale, but the
bottom line is that the scale does matter
if you're trying to accurately track your
progress and it's one method that you should
be using as part of your overall program in
combination with other methods, assuming you
want to progress as efficiently as possible.
If you're in a focus fat loss phase and you're
trying to lean down, then the number on the
scale should generally be decreasing over
time.
Usually about one to two pounds per week on
average is a sweet spot for most people.
Some can go a bit faster and going slower
can be fine as well if you're taking a more
gradual approach to things or if you only
have a small amount of fat to lose.
But one to two pounds is going to be about
right in most cases.
And if the number is completely stagnant and
it isn't going down at all, then that's how
you know that you're not in a proper calorie
deficit and that you need to make some adjustments.
And the only way to really know that precisely
is by tracking your body weight.
On the other hand, if you're in a focus bulking
phase and you're trying to gain muscle, then
the number on the scale should be increasing
over time, usually about half a pound per
week for a beginner or three pounds per month
maximum.
About half that amount for females, and then
the rates should decrease by about 50% for
every year of proper training after the first
one.
If the number isn't going up, then you know
that you're not in a calorie surplus and that
you need to bump up your food intake a bit.
Or if the number is going up too quickly,
then you know that you're probably gaining
a disproportionate amount of fat and that
you need to scale back slightly.
And again, the only way you'll really know
that for sure is by tracking your weight on
the scale.
Now, some people will say that it's not all
about the scale because the scale doesn't
tell you what type of body weight you're gaining
or losing, and so body fat percentage is what's
most important.
But the problem with that is that accurately
tracking your body fat percentage is very
difficult, if not impossible to do.
All methods of measuring body fat have certain
inherent flaws and they're never going to
be a 100% accurate.
And so if you're relying solely on body fat
readings, especially if it's not through a
DEXA scan, then that can easily throw you
off and give you the wrong idea as to what
kind of progress you're actually making or
not making.
Whereas with body weight, assuming you're
using a digital scale that isn't broken, then
you're going to get a perfect weight reading
every time.
Your weight is going to fluctuate from day-to-day,
depending on certain factors, but by measuring
the average change in body weight over time
you are going to end up with a fairly accurate
picture of how things are progressing overall.
And also as long as you're following a properly
structured program, meaning you're in a calorie
deficit that isn't excessively large, usually
about 500 below maintenance is a good guideline.
Or you're in a calorie surplus that isn't
accessibly large, usually about 200 to 300
calories above maintenance and then you're
combining that with enough daily protein and
a properly laid out progressive weight training
program.
And you're making consistent strength gains
on that program, and then on top of that your
body weight is increasing or decreasing somewhere
within those ranges that I gave earlier.
If you're doing those basic things, you pretty
much already know that the bulk of your weight
loss or your weight gain is going to be the
right type of body weight.
Whether that's primarily losing body fat while
cutting or primarily gaining lean muscle while
bulking.
You're not just going to magically lose muscle
while cutting or gain excessive fat while
bulking if those factors are covered.
Now, like I said, the scale isn't everything
and there are still some other tools that
you can use in combination with that in order
to fine-tune your progress tracking further.
So that would be things like I'm taking body
part measurements, progress photos, paying
attention to how your clothes fit.
Tracking your strength progress in the gym
and if you have the money for it and you want
the most accurate picture possible, then you
could throw in a DEXA scan here and there
as well.
And I did two detailed videos on this subject,
one that talks about how to track progress
during a bulking phase and one for tracking
progress during a cutting phase.
And I'll link both of those in the description
box if you do want to check them out.
Now when you are using the scale as a way
to track your progress, just make sure you're
doing it properly.
So that means taking your weight first thing
in the morning before eating or drinking anything.
And preferably after using the washroom and
also not obsessing over the exact number between
any two individual days because the number
is going to fluctuate depending on things
like food volume in your system, hydration,
glycogen storage, water retention.
Especially if you end up going higher or lower
on total calories for a given day, in which
case your weight might spike up or down by
one to two pounds or more overnight just from
those things alone.
Instead of stressing out over the number every
single day, focus more on your average weight
for one week compared to your average weight
for the next week.
And then the final point I'd make here is
to also not obsess over your body weight in
the absolute sense.
In other words, the point of tracking your
body weight is to measure the relative increase
or decrease over time for you as an individual.
But there's no single ideal weight that you
need to reach in comparison to someone else
because there are so many factors that influence
any given person's weight.
Their height, bone mass, their overall body
structure, their body fat percentage.
All of these things will influence how much
any given person weighs on the scale and you
could have two people with a very similar
look in terms of their overall aesthetics
but who have very different body weights depending
on a combination of those factors.
You know, somebody at five foot four could
potentially look really jacked at 150 pounds
where somebody who is six foot two might have
similar looking muscularity at 200 pounds.
Or on the leaner side of things, someone could
look very lean and in shape at one specific
body weight, whereas someone else might be
25 pounds heavier but look just as lean.
So track your weight for yourself on the way
to your desired look.
But don't get too caught up in the comparison
game and start aiming for a certain body weight
just because it seems right on paper or because
it's how much someone else ways because everybody
is different in this respect.
If you did find the advice in this video helpful
and you want to get all the tools you need
to achieve your goal physique as efficiently
as possible with everything laid out in a
step-by-step fashion from start to finish,
then make sure to take my physique quiz over
at quiz.SeanNal.com because that'll get you
set up with the optimal training and nutrition
plan for you based on your individual goals,
body type and experience level.
You can click up here for that or use the
link in the description box below.
On the supplementation side of things you
can also visit RealScienceAthletics.com to
check out my science-based, no BS formulas
to fully maximize your results and improve
the overall convenience of your program.
The link for that is also in the description
and of course make sure to hit that like button.
Leave a comment down below and subscribe if
you haven't already so that you don't miss
out on any future videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.