Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTranformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to address a very simple topic
but one that I do get asked about quite frequently
and that is on the issue of proper creatine
dosing.
So the truth here is that optimal creatine
supplementation is way, way simpler than most
people make it out to be and all of the imaginary
problems that supplement companies invent
when it comes to standard creatine monohydrate
supplemention is really just a bunch of marketing
BS.
So how much creatine should you be taking
each day?
Well it's very simple.
Creatine is the most studied sports supplement
in the world and the research points to a
very simple daily creatine dosage of 3 to
5 grams in order to reach full saturation
in most lifters which is equal to about 1
teaspoon.
The exact dosage would technically vary from
person to person depending on their body weight,
but worrying about an extra gram here and
there probably isn't really going to do you
any good or make any difference in the big
picture.
And since creatine is pretty well cheaper
than sand when your purchase it in bulk, going
with a simple 5 gram per day dosage once a
day is probably going to be the best route
for most people.
A few other important points to consider on
this issue.
Number 1, make sure to stick with basic creatine
monohydrate, as it is still research backed
to be the most effective form available, and
ideally find a product that uses CreaPure
as the source, such as Optimum Nutrition which
I will link in the description box below.
All of the newer "advanced" forms of creatine
such as, creatine ethyl ester, buffered creatine,
creatine hydrochloride, liquid creatine serum
etcetera are going to run you up to 10 times
the cost of standard monohydrate, while delivering
either the same or inferior effects.
Secondly, performing a loading phase of 20
grams a day for the first 5 days, which is
typically split into 4 doses of 5 grams each,
is entirely optional.
All that really does is allow you to reach
full creatine saturation at a faster pace,
but after about 3 weeks of consistent use
you'll be at exactly the same point whether
you loaded or simply went with the 5 gram
per day dosage from the start.
Third, cycling on and off of creatine has
absolutely no added benefits whatsoever, and
if you're looking to get the maximum benefit
from your creatine supplementation then simply
use 5 grams per day on a continual basis.
Number 4, it makes no difference whether you
take creatine in the morning, pre-workout,
post-workout, before bed or at any other time
of the day.
Creatine does not exert any immediate effects
on strength and performance.
The benefits that you get from creatine use
come from consistent daily use over the long
term, and your body's going to absorb it just
fine regardless of when you consume it.
So simply take your 5 grams of creatine whenever
it's most convenient for you.
And finally you can mix your creatine with
any liquid that you want whether it be water,
tea, juice or a protein shake.
Contrary to popular advice, it does not have
to be mixed with simple sugars or any other
special concoctions in order to be fully absorbed
by your body.
So to wrap this up, in order to obtain the
maximum benefit that creatine supplementation
has to offer, this is all you really need
to know.
Consume 3 to 5 grams of creatine monohydrate
once per day ideally in the form of CreaPure,
mixed in whatever liquid you prefer, at any
time of day that you prefer.
That's really there is to it.
Don't fall for the supplement marketing hype.
Until or unless further research surfaces
demonstrating added benefits from any other
creatine dosing methods, this is really all
you need to know.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
and make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the Description
box.
Talk to you again soon.