What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewayj, www.SeanNal.com and I wanted
to make a quick video today answering a subscriber
question.
The question being about natural, over the
counter HGH boosters, basically just asking
if growth hormone boosting supplements have
any real use when it comes to building muscle
or burning fat.
So if you flipped open any fitness magazine
or even just scrolled through most typical
bodybuilding websites online then you’ve
probably seen those ads for HGH releasers.
They’re pretty much everywhere and they
usually have a long list of claimed benefits
like increasing fatloss, building muscle,
enhancing sleep and focus and even slowing
down or reversing aging.
So first off, what is growth hormone?
Just really simply it is a hormone that is
produced in the pituitary gland.
It gets released into your body [Indiscernible]
throughout the day and the highest amount
gets released just after you fall asleep and
during exercise.
Particularly during types of training that
create large amounts of lactic acid so higher
rep-shorter rest period types of workouts.
And then once that growth hormone gets released
it causes your liver to produce insulin-like
growth factor of IGF-1, which maybe you’ve
heard about, and IGF-1 then goes on to play
a ton of different roles in the body.
Now, a lot of people think of growth hormone
as being a powerful muscle builder but the
research doesn’t actually support that.
If we’re talking about people with an actual
growth hormone deficiency then yes it will
build muscle effectively but in otherwise
healthy people it’s not really a significant
muscle builder unless you use it at extremely
high doses.
And even then, keep in mind that growth hormone
doesn’t just increased muscle mass but it
also increases the size of your organs and
your viscera, which is why you’ll often
see those bloated looking bodybuilders with
distended looking stomach usually called a
GH-gut.
So, growth hormones main effects aren’t
so much muscle building related but more so
they’re related to fatloss.
It is a pretty powerful fat burner and it’s
also used as, sort of, a recuperation tool
for enhancing recovery in between workouts
or for athletes who want to stay in top condition
between training sessions.
And it also plays a role in healing injuries
as well, so for these reasons that a lot of
enhanced bodybuilders and athletes use growth
hormone to get those effects.
So yes, actual exogenous human growth hormone
itself does have a pretty significant collection
of benefits but the real question here is
whether or not natural, over the counter HGH
boosters can replicate or even come close
to replicating those same effects.
And the short and simple answer is that: No,
they can’t.
There are compounds out there that can increase
growth hormone levels naturally but the increases
that you’ll get are almost certainly not
going to be large enough or sustained over
a long enough period to where you’ll actually,
noticeably loose more fat or build more muscle
as a result.
So supplements like L-Arginine, gaba, [Indiscernible],
glutamine, Alpha-GPC, there’s a few others
as well, all of these have been shown in research
to give you temporary spikes in growth hormone
but those spikes aren’t that large and they
do fall back to baseline pretty quickly as
well.
I’m not going to go into all the details
in this video on all the different popular
growth hormone boosters that are out there,
otherwise the video will just drag on forever,
but I will put a brief overview of some of
the research on each one in the description
box if that is something that interest you.
Just keep in mind that boosting growth hormone
in and of itself doesn’t really tell us
much of anything and the question that you
really need to ask is by how much and for
how long.
Because just like with testosterone, HGH levels
have to be significantly increased above baseline
for an extended period of time in order for
it to make any real difference to your actual
body composition.
And most study using exogenous growth hormone,
they boost those levels by around three hundred
to six hundred percent and they keep them
there for an extended period.
And there’s just no research available to
show that any natural growth hormone supplements
can come anywhere near this.
So it’s possible that combining certain
supplements along with other natural methods
like maintaining a healthy bodyfat level,
sleeping well, exercising regularly, fasting,
it’s possible that it could deliver some
overall health benefits when combined with
those things but if you’re specifically
using a natural growth hormone booster to
directly burn more bodyfat then you’re likely
wasting your money and if you’re using it
build more muscle then you’re almost certainly
wasting your money.
Because it’s just not going to raise GH
levels by a high enough amount in the overall
picture regardless of what all those supplement
companies try to tell you.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope this was helpful.
If you enjoy this science based, no BS approach
to fitness and you want to learn how to build
muscle and lose fat without the gimmicks or
hype then you can visit www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the little icon at the top of
the screen here or by using the link in the
description box.
That will allow you to access my complete
Body Transformation Blueprint which lays out
everything you need to know step-by-step.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
Feel free to like, share, comment and subscribe
if you did find the information helpful.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.