Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video lesson I want to answer the basic question
of what the best creatine on the market is.
So creatine is going to benefit your program
in two main ways.
Number 1, by increasing the efficiency of
your body’s ATP system.
ATP is the primary energy molecule that is
used by your body during explosive activities
like weight training and as a result of this
your overall strength and performance are
going to increase.
And number 2, by drawing more water into your
muscle cells which is going to give you a
fuller and thicker overall appearance.
Now ever since the original creatine monohydrate
form was released about twenty years ago,
a whole collection of “new and improved”
creatines have come along with it and this
includes a huge list.
Creatine ethyl ester, buffered creatine, creatine
hydrochloride, creatine nitrate, creatine
malate, these are just a few of the many,
many examples.
And the basic theme here is always the same.
Any time a “breakthrough” form of creatine
is released, first, they, they go ahead and
they point out a bunch of supposed problems
that are associated with creatine monohydrate
use.
The most common of these include, that it
has a poor absorption rate, it causes bloating
or upset stomach or cramps.
And secondly, they’ll claim that their specific
form of creatine solves these problems in
order to deliver superior muscle building
benefits.
But what's the reality here?
Well all of the claims that are commonly made
about creatine monohydrate by these companies
are nothing more than made-up nonsense in
order to sell their “improved” version
which is always far more expensive as well.
But here are the simple facts.
Number 1, creatine monohydrate has a very
high bio-availability in humans and the majority
of the creatine monohydrate that you consume
will be absorbed by your body.
Number 2, creatine monohydrate just like all
forms of creatine, increases intracellular
water retention to give your muscles a fuller
and thicker look, however, this water is deposited
inside of the actual muscle cell itself and
not subcutaneously, so not underneath your
skin.
And for that reason, creatine monohydrate
does not actually cause any form of “bloating”
like is commonly claimed.
And number 3, creatine monohydrate is the
most widely studied sports supplement available
and it has been shown to be both safe and
effective in the short and long term when
it is consumed at the recommended 3 to 5 gram
per day dosage.
It does not cause unwanted side effects like
cramps or bloating in otherwise healthy individuals.
So the research on this issue is very clear.
Creatine monohydrate is still the best creatine
available, as no other forms have ever been
demonstrated to deliver measurably superior
effects.
And in fact, some of these so-called “advanced”
forms have actually been shown to be directly
inferior to creatine monohydrate.
For example, creatine ethyl ester, which is
one of the most popular forms of creatine
available, has actually been shown in concrete
research to increase the likelihood of subcutaneous
water retention while also converting into
the waste product creatinine at a faster rate
than monohydrate.
Buffered creatine was also debunked in a recent
study which I did a video about a, about a
week ago and it showed no additional benefits
even at three times the manufacturer's recommended
dosage.
Add in the fact that all of these newer forms
of creatine usually are about 3 to 10 times
more expensive than monohydrate and the decision
should be pretty obvious.
The best creatine available for maximizing
muscle size and strength gains is still creatine
monohydrate.
It is backed by endless piles of research.
It has never been shown to be inferior to
any other form, and it's also the most cost
effective as well.
So my simple recommendation is to avoid the
fairy-tale creatine hype and stick with basic
creapure creatine monohydrate at a dosage
of about 3-5 grams per day.
And if you want to get my complete muscle
building and fat loss supplementation recommendations
then you can download my complete supplement
guide using the link in the description box.
So thanks alot for watching this video lesson.
If you did find the information useful here
today please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up to
date on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete fully
structured step-by-step muscle building and
fat loss programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box,
and make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.