Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And today, I want to cover a very popular
topic which is the issue of post workout nutrition.
Now, post workout nutrition has become like
a religion in bodybuilding circles, usually
called, "The window of opportunity." The three
to four-hour period immediately following
a workout session is considered a critical
time to provide your body with high quality
protein and carbs to support muscle growth
and recovery. If you ask almost any bodybuilding
expert out there, they'll tell you that in
order to maximize your gains you must consume
a high protein, high carb post-workout shake immediately after
your workout, followed by another solid food
meal about an hour or so later. But is post-workout
nutrition really all that it's made out to
be? And if so, what is the best post-workout
meal? First off, let's took -- take a look
at the two major claims made by those who
continue to emphasize the critical importance
of post-workout nutrition. So, claim number
one is the idea that you must consume a liquid
protein shake immediately following your workout.
The reality here is that protein digestion
is a very slow and gradual process. Even the
fastest absorbing proteins are still only
released at a rate of about 8grams to 10grams
per hour. And what this means is that if you
consumed a pre-workout meal within a couple
hours of your training session, that same
protein is still being broken down and utilized
both during and after your workout. And for
that reason, consuming a new serving of protein
immediately after your workout is simply unnecessary.
Claim number two is that you must consume
a serving of simple carbohydrates along with
your protein shake in order to restore glycogen
levels and spike your insulin. Now, the reality
here is that glycogen levels are only depleted
by a maximum of about 30% following an intense
weight training workout. And even then, there
is no need to immediately replenish those
levels unless you were training the same muscle
groups again on the same day. As for spiking
insulin levels, most people don't know this,
but proteins actually elicit a significant
insulin response from the body on their own,
making an additional carbohydrate consumption
far less important than most people think.
So, given these two points, it's pretty clear
that there is no need to immediately consume
a post-workout meal after your training session
is over. Your body still has ample protein
in circulation. And your glycogen levels don't
need to be immediately replenished. Now, I'm
not saying that you shouldn't eat a post-workout
meal. All I'm saying is that, it doesn't have
to be consumed right away. You know, you certainly
want to provide your body with some high quality
protein and carbohydrates to support muscle
recovery and growth after your workout is
over. But if your appetite isn't quite there
yet, don't feel bad waiting a couple hours.
So, what is the best post-workout meal? Well,
you really don't have to overcomplicate things
here. Your two basic goals with your post-workout
meal are to elevate insulin levels in order
to halt muscle breakdown, and to provide your
body with amino acids in order to stimulate
protein synthesis. And there's no need for
some fancy, high-tech concoction of special
foods, or high glycemic carbs or specific
fats in order to accomplish this. The first
thing you want is a high quality protein source.
Now, whey will be the ideal choice here due
to its strong amino acid profile and high
bioavailability. But ultimately any standard
protein source will do just fine. Beef, chicken,
fish, eggs, lean pork, seafood, any of these
are completely fine choices. And the second
component is going to be a source of carbohydrates.
And this can be any source of carbohydrates
that you'd like. You don't need anything specific
here. Rice, yams, fruit, potatoes, oatmeal,
whatever goes best with your protein source.
If you do want to go with the standard post-workout
shake of whey protein and simple sugars, that's
also fine too. It's really up to you. You
know, I personally don't have much of an appetite
following workouts and find that a post-workout
shake fits nicely for me. So again, it's really
largely a matter of personal preference. So,
that's really all there is to it. As long
as you consume a good pre-workout meal about
1.5 to 2 hours prior to your training session,
followed by a post-workout meal of high quality
protein and carbs within a couple hours of
finishing your workout, you're pretty much
good to go. This combination is going to provide
your body with a sufficient stream of amino
acids, sugars and micronutrients to maximize
muscle recovery and overall growth. You can
continue obsessing about nitty-gritty details
beyond this. But the only thing that's going
to do is just unnecessarily overcomplicate
your nutrition plan. So, if you found this
information useful, please make sure to like
the video, leave a comment and subscribe to
stay up-to-date on all of our future videos.
Don't forget to download your free 28-day
mass building plan over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link to which is in the description box
below. And don't forget to join our Facebook
page, where we do free supplement giveaways
every Thursday night. Thanks again for watching.
I'll talk to you again soon with more free
tips.