Hey, what’s up guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here just got back from the
gym and I wanted to put up a quick video here,
just showing you a simple whey protein shake
recipe that’s pretty much been my go to
combination for probably six or seven years
now.
Obviously there are tons of really good protein
shake recipes out there but I’ve always
defaulted back to this one because it’s
easy to make.
It taste really good as long as you have a
decently flavored protein powder to work with
and it has good balanced macros too.
So nothing fancy but I was going to come home
here and make one right now anyway, so I’ve
figured I just pull up the camera and show
you guys.
So the base of the shake is almond milk and
I’ll use one cup for that, you can use any
type of milk you want.
So if you prefer like, regular skim milk then
that’s fine too but I prefer the almond
milk.
And then I throw in a little bit of ice here,
so there’s three ice cubes there.
The fat source, I use natural peanut butter
and I’ll throw in one table spoon of that.
First carb source is oatmeal and I’ll put
in half a cup of that.
And then for the second carb source I’ll
throw in, like a medium size banana.
For the protein I’ll just use basic chocolate
whey protein powder, you can use any flavor
you like and I’ll also put my recommended
protein powders in the description box below.
And to finish the shake off I’ll just throw
in a little bit of cinnamon just for some
added flavoring.
Then I’ll pull out my trusty hand blender
and thoroughly blend up all of the ingredients.
And then there’s the finished shake there,
the nutritional break down is 522 calories,
36 grams of protein, 61 of carbs and 15 grams
of fat.
And I’ll put the macros and the recipe in
the description box below.
So that’s all there is to it.
High quality protein, good nutrient, dense
carbs, some healthy fats and you can put this
altogether and drink it down in just a few
minutes without a bunch of preparation, chewing,
clean up and all that.
It’s just a really convenient way to hit
your nutrition for the day more easily.
And if you want that shake to be higher or
lower calorie depending on your needs, then
you can increase or decrease the amounts of
the ingredients pretty easily.
It’s not set in stone, so just play around
with it and see what you like best.
So just the quick whey protein shake recipe
idea for you and if you have a recipe of your
own that you personally really like then feel
free to share it in the comments below.
So thanks for watching, the official website
is www.SeanNal.com.
You can follow me on Facebook, Twitter and
Instagram for more free tips if you weren’t
already.
My Body Transformation Blueprint can be accessed
at www.BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
here or using the link below and make sure
to like, comment and subscribe to stay up
to date on future videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.