What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and it’s
been awhile since I’ve done a supplement
review, and this a compound that I get asked
about quite often so I wanted to do a video
today talking about Yohimbine, which has a
few different uses but it’s most commonly
used as a fatloss supplement.
So what is Yohimbine?
What does it do?
Does it actually work?
And what’s the proper dosage?
So, Yohimbine is a compound that comes from
the bark of the yohimbe tree which is found
in Africa and to keep it simple it works by
increasing the release of adrenaline and noradrenaline
and those bind the fat cells in order to mobilize
the fat.
And the one of the other big supposed benefits
of Yohimbine, which hasn’t been proven,
is that it helps to specifically targets stubborn
fat areas which would be the lower ab area
in men as well as the oblique area and the
hips and thighs in women.
And the reason for that is that fat cells
have two types of receptors which are the
alpha receptors and the beta receptors, and
stubborn fat areas have higher concentrations
of alpha receptors.
And those are the ones that Yohimbine specifically
works on.
And on top of its direct fat burning facts
Yohimbine can also help to suppress your appetite
and if you’re using it pre workout then
it can help to increase your overall energy
levels as well.
Now, does Yohimbine actually work?
The short answer is that it probably does
help with fatloss a bit but only to a small
degree.
I’d say within the scope of whats available
in terms of fatloss supplements it’s definitely
one of the more effective compounds out there
but just like with any supplement, even though
with one that technically do work, they aren’t
going to perform any miracles and they’re
just going to be there to give you a small
extra boost.
Yohimbine does have a decent amount of research
behind it.
Some of it looks pretty good on paper but
a lot of the studies do have certain limitations
that make it hard to figure out if the subjects
were actually losing bodyfat or just water
weight.
Because Yohimbine is actually dieuretic as
well and so it can be hard to determine exactly
of how much of each is being loss.
I’m not going to go into the details of
the studies here because I want to keep this
video concise and not too technical but I’ll
put some links in the description box if you
do want to check that out.
But the bottom line is that Yohimbine probably
does have some fat burning effects but they
will be fairly small.
You’ll probably see a small increase in
your overall metabolic rate, a small increase
in energy and a small decrease in appetite.
So if you’re someone who’s trying to diet
down to a fairly lean level and you want to
fully maximize your results and you’re open
to supplementation, you have the money to
spend then it could be worth a try in certain
context.
Now that said, this does come with a very
important warning and it’s the main reason
why I don’t actively recommend Yohimbine
to people and why I’m really careful about
what I say about it.
And that is that for a certain percentage
of people it can have a pretty serious side
effects, specifically in people who are prone
to anxiety or panic attack, especially if
it’s being combined with other stimulants
like caffeine.
Yohimbine is highly stimulatory, it increases
your heart rate, it increases your blood pressure
and it essentially rams up your body’s fighter
fight response.
So if you identify as being someone with any
sorts of issues with anxiety in general I
would recommend that you just stay away from
Yohimbine altogether because it can really
easily trigger additional anxiety and make
it worse.
And for the modest fat burning effect that
you might get, it’s really just not going
to be worth it.
And besides generalize anxiety people with
bipolar disorder also want to completely stay
away from it because it can have some pretty
serious effects there.
Or if you’re using any kind of neurological
medication you’ll also want to be really
careful there too because there’s a lot
of interactions that can take place there.
So I just stayed away from it in that case
or at the very least make sure to do your
research and talk to your doctor as well.
Now, if you don’t have any anxiety issues
and you tolerate stimulants just fine then
Yohimbine could be a supplement to experiment
with.
But I’d only recommend bothering with it
if you’re already fairly lean and you’re
just trying to lose that last bit of stubborn
fat.
And that’s because number one: if your just
starting out on your fatloss phase or if you’re
midway through it and you still have a decent
amount of fat to lose, fat mobilization isn’t
going to be a problem for you at that point
and you’ll be able to lose fat just fine
with a standard cutting diet and training
plan without using any fatloss supplement
at all.
And number two: I wouldn’t recommend using
Yohimbine for an extended period of time just
to be one the safe side because you’ll probably
developed tolerance to it pretty quickly.
The effects on noradrenaline are almost completely
lost even after as short as two weeks and
so I would say to just use it on an as needed
basis for a short time toward the end of your
cutting phase if you’re trying to get particularly
lean for a certain event or maybe if you’ve
hit around twelve percent bodyfat and you
just want a little push to help you get slightly
lower.
And if you are going to use it for a longer
period of time then you’ll definitely want
to make sure you cycle it.
Now, in terms of Yohimbine dosage the standard
recommended amount is 0.2 milligrams per kilogram
of body weight.
So assuming you are only using it once you’ve
gotten fairly lean then the dosage is going
to range anywhere from about 5 milligrams
for a smaller female up to about fifteen milligrams
or slightly higher for a male.
But make sure to start out low to assess your
tolerance first and then gradually increased
from there rather than just taking the full
dose all at once because you want to know
how it affects you first before you increase.
And also make sure to take it on an empty
stomach because insulin almost completely
erases the effects of Yohimbine so you’ll
ideally want to use it in a fasted state if
you can.
And one final point to be aware of when it
comes to Yohimbine is the controversy about
the actual potency of the Yohimbine supplements
that are available.
There’s a study done on this, which I’ll
link in the description box, it looked at
forty nine different Yohimbine supplements
and it found that only two brands actually
met the label claim and that in total the
actual amounts range from as low as about
twenty percent up to a hundred and fifty percent
of what was listed.
So in some cases the dosage would be so low
that it wouldn’t provide any benefit and
in some cases the dosage would be high enough
that you might end up with side effects even
if you think you’re taking the proper amount,
so just another reason to be cautious and
to do your research first before you start
using a Yohimbine supplement.
But bottom line on Yohimbine if you’re toward
the end of a cutting phase and you’re looking
for a few percent of extra results to help
you lean down further then Yohimbine might
assist you.
But the effects are going to be modest either
way and there’s still no guarantee that
it will work because the research is still
inconclusive on just how effective it is.
But only use it if you tolerate stimulants
well and you have no issues with anxiety and
use it cautiously by starting out on a lower
dose and gradually increasing and only by
using it short term or by cycling it.
So I hope you guys found this advice helpful.
If you appreciate the no B.S.
science based approach to fitness and you
want to get all the tools you need to gain
muscle and lose fat as effectively as possible,
the workouts, the meal plans, the supplement
guides along with one-on-one coaching then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.