Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, and today I’m
going to be reviving an old Q&A series that
I used to do a couple years back called “Muscle
In Minutes” where I give quick, just to
the point answers to your guys’ fitness
questions, and I’m going to try to the answers
to around 2-3 minutes each.
A lot of my videos tend to be fairly drawn
out and I usually like to go into a lot of
detail on each topic, which I know that a
lot of you guys like, but I want to also start
putting out some shorter videos here and there
with basically just quick bits of information
that you can directly take and use without
giving a ton of supporting examples or details.
So I’ll start putting these out a couple
times a week and I'll see how you guys like
them and then if it makes sense I’ll keep
it as a regular part of the channel.
So today’s question is from Ed, and his
question is basically “is cardio really
necessary for fat loss or is dieting on its
own enough?”
So the short and simple answer here is that
fat loss is achieved by maintaining a net
“energy deficit” over time.
You consume fewer calories than you burn on
a consistent basis, and that's going to force
your body to burn up its excess fat stores
for use as energy.
Cardio is one means of creating and maintaining
a net energy deficit by increasing your overall
energy expenditure, but it’s actually not
mandatory, since you can simply take in fewer
calories through your diet and end up with
the same basic deficit at the end of the day.
However, even though cardio isn’t a mandatory
requirement for fat loss, I still recommend
that anybody trying to lean down or even to
build muscle still perform at least a couple
of cardio sessions per week as part of their
overall plan because it does provide quite
a few benefits in terms of just basic overall
health and fitness, and some of those benefits
will also have direct carryover to your physique
goals as well.
Regular cardio will obviously improve your
overall cardiovascular conditioning which
may have some carryover to certain weight
training exercises at the gym, it can help
to improve nutrient portioning, low intensity
cardio can improve muscular recovery in between
workouts, these are just a few of the many
benefits.
So, bottom line, cardio is not mandatory for
fat loss but I do think that someone who uses
a combination of both dieting and cardio when
trying to lose fat or build muscle, will still
see better overall results in the long term,
and again, the basic health benefits shouldn’t
be ignored either.
2-3 cardio sessions per week will work well
in most situations as a basic starting point,
and I recommend using a mix of both high intensity/short
duration cardio and low intensity/long duration
cardio because both forms have their own unique
benefits.
So thanks for watching this video, make sure
to like, comment and subscribe if you found
the information helpful, you can also get
instant access to my complete Body Transformation
Blueprint System by clicking the icon at the
top of the video or by using the link in the
description box below, and make sure to check
out my official blog over at SeanNal.com to
stay up to date on all of my latest content.
Talk to you again soon.