Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here,
and I just wanted to record a quick video
to touch on a brief subject.
And that is on the issue of exercises that
have a relatively short range of motion.
So, specifically talking about shrugging movements,
calf movements, certain forearm movement,
some ab exercises.
A common theme that I tend to see at the gym
is where with these types of exercises, for
some reason, people tend to approach it with
a different sort of mentality, where they'll
just slop an arbitrary amount of weight on
the bar and kind of just pumped out their
reps in a really fast kind of non-targeted
way.
So, they don't really know, you know, exactly
how much weight they used in the -- in the
previous workout or what their exact goal
is.
For -- for these types of exercises, people
just tend to again, just kind of quickly pumped
out their reps, continue the set until it
starts to burn, and then just stop.
The important thing to remember is that you're
traps, your calves, your abs, your forearm,
(it's not your) arm muscles just like any
other.
And so, they respond to intensity and progression
in the same way.
So, every time you perform a shrugging movement
of a calf raise, you should know exactly how
much weight you used in the previous workout,
how many reps you did, and then, strive for
improvement in the current workout.
And in addition, there's no reason to perform
these exercises with a faster pace or in a
more explosive manner than any other movement.
Even though the range of -- range of motion
is short, you know, you still want to pick
a way that you can control, that you can do
a good deliberate negative with, and you can
perform for a good solid full range of motion.
So, I'm not saying that every single set has
to be taken to failure, but I will show you
a quick clip of a set of Smith Machine Shrugs.
This is from a workout several months back,
just to show you how I approach these types
of exercises.
And again, you'll see that I'm not just pumping
out the reps and performing this exercise
in the same way that any other exercise is
performed.
So, a good controlled negative, brief pause
at the top-end bottom, using a full range
of motion and training with a high level of
intensity.
So, I'll show you that now.
So again, this is a clip from several months
back.
This is a workout where every set was take
into concentric failure.
But even if you're not training all the way
to failure, if you're training one or two
rep short, the same basic approach applies.
So, as you can see, I'm performing each rep
with a controlled and deliberate cadence,
relatively slow negative pausing at the top
and bottom, using a full range of motion.
And as you can see, I'm training with full
focus.
And I know exactly what I did in the previous
workout, and I know exactly what I need to
do in this workout in order to improve.
So, as you can see, this is -- this type of
approach looks a lot different than what you
see most guys doing in the gym, much higher
level of -- of intensity, much higher focus.
And this is how all of your shrugging movements
should be performed.
So, I hope you found this quick tip useful
today.
As always, if you found this information helpful,
please make sure to hit the like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all of our future video lessons.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide, over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching.
And I'll talk to you again, soon with more
free bodybuilding tips.