Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
And today, I just want to discuss the issue
of whey protein and how it compares to whole
foods as an overall muscle building protein
source.
So, if you browse the online bodybuilding
forums or you read articles from your typical
run-of-the-mill guru, the standard piece of
advice that you're going to get on this issue
is that whey protein is fine to consume as
a supplement, but that whole food protein
should make up the majority of your diet,
and that they're somehow superior when it
comes to building muscle, burning fat and
enhancing your overall health.
Now, the fundamental error in this debate
is that there's no reason at all to separate
whey protein and whole foods into two categories
to begin with, because in reality, they're
the same thing.
Whey protein is a natural dairy derivative
that is isolated during the process of turning
milk into cheese.
So, it's food in the same way that chicken,
steak and eggs are food.
And this is why people should stop viewing
whey as a supplement, and instead view it
as just one more component of their whole
food diet in the same way that they view any
other protein source.
Not only that, but the people who tell you
that traditional bodybuilding whole foods
like chicken or steak are superior to whey
protein are actually wrong.
The opposite is true.
And we can just compare them objectively to
see why this is the case.
So, the first is the issue of bioavailability.
Whey protein actually has the highest bioavailability
of any protein available, which means that
your body will absorb and utilized the highest
percentage of the total protein content in
comparison to any other source.
The second is the amino acid profile.
Whey protein delivers the highest concentration
of the most valuable amino acids that are
involved in supporting muscle recovery and
growth, particularly the branched-chain amino
acids, L-Leucine, L-Valine and L-Isoleucine.
The third is the carb and fat content.
Whey delivers the most isolated source of
protein possible with the highest quality
whey isolates, providing 0 fat and only 1gram
of carbs per serving.
And the fourth issue is the simple matter
of convenience, because of its powdered form,
whey is easily the most convenient source
of protein out there.
You can use it to mix up a quick liquid shake.
You can sprinkle it on top of your oatmeal,
or your yogurt, or your cereal or you can
use it to make a variety of other very easy
recipes.
And in addition to those four benefits, whey
protein is also been shown to improve immune
system health by raising glutathione levels,
it regulates appetite, it increases serotonin
production, which regulates mode and anxiety
levels and it also has direct fat burning
properties as well.
So, as you can see, not only is whey protein
a whole food just like any other, but it's
actually the highest quality source that you
can consume.
So, don't fall into the trap of viewing whey
as some sort of separate supplement.
Instead, just incorporated it into your overall
died in the same way that you would any other
food source.
And because of the unique advantage that whey
protein does provide, I usually recommend
that people, who are serious about their bodybuilding
results and their overall health, aim to get
in at least a couple scoops of whey protein
per day.
And for most people, that will represent about
25% of their total protein intake.
So, I hope you found the information here
helpful.
If you do want to check out a very high quality
whey protein isolate blend that you can include
in your diet, make sure to check out our IsoM3
formula, over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
If you did find the information here helpful,
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page for free daily articles, videos,
tips and supplement giveaways.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
And I'll talk to you again soon.