Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
the muscle in minutes Q&A, where I answer
your bodybuilding and fitness questions in
two minutes or less, today's question is a
pretty simple one.
It's on the issue of creatine supplementation,
and more specifically on the loading phase.
So, whether or not, it is necessary to load
your creatine and perform the -- the five-day
loading phase as opposed to just taking a
standard dosage each day.
So, the recommended daily study dose for creatine
monohydrate is about 3grams to 5grams per
day for most people, which is equal to about
a teaspoon.
And the goal of creatine supplementation is
to achieve full creatine saturation of the
muscle tissue.
So, you can go about this in a couple of way,
you can either just start off from day one.
And take 3grams to 5grams creatine per day
continuously.
If you do that you will achieve full creatine
saturation after about 20 days, or you can
get those results quicker by performing a
loading phase.
There's no single loading phase protocol.
But a pretty standard method is where you're
going to take in 20grams of creatine for the
first five days.
So, four servings of 5grams.
And then just follow the 3gram to 5gram per
day maintenance dose after that.
If you do that, you're going to achieve full
creatine saturation after the five-day loading
period.
So, that's really all there is to it.
The end result is exactly the same.
The only difference is that if you perform
a loading phase, you're going to see those
results after -- sorry, the full results of
creatine usage after five days.
And if you just follow the 3gram to 5gram
per day dose from the get-go, you're going
to get the full benefits after about 20 days.
So, it's really as simple as that.
There's no super benefits to loading.
It doesn't give you enhanced result as opposed
to the standard maintenance dose.
It just let's you saturate your muscles at
a faster rate.
Now, if you need to obtain those full creatine
benefits quickly, maybe you have an athletic
event or something that you're competing in
or you want to -- you need to boost your strength
quickly or get that increased water in the
muscle cells quickly.
For some reason, then, go ahead and load.
But if you can be a little bit more patient,
and wait like an extra two weeks, just go
with standard 3gram to 5gram per day dose,
because you're going to get the same results.
And you're going to end up saving somewhere
between 60gram to 80grams of creatine powder.
So, that's that question answered.
I hope you found this useful.
If you did find this information helpful,
please make sure to hit the like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all of our feature videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video.
And I will talk to you again soon.