Sean Nalewanyj here, MuscleGainTruth.com with
another bodybuilding video lesson for you.
And in today's lesson, I want to talk to you
about a very common question that I get asked.
And that is on the topic of muscle soreness.
You know, you know the -- you know the scenario,
you go to the gym, you do a nice hard chest
workout.
You wake up the next morning, your chest is
nice and sore, and you think, man, I must
have had a really good chest workout, because
look at how sore I am or the opposite happens,
you go, you do your chest workout.
You wake up.
And you think, shit, I'm not sore.
That means I must not have had a good workout.
In reality, muscle soreness has almost nothing
to do with whether or not you successfully
stimulated muscle growth during your workout.
It's called, "Delayed onset muscle soreness"
or DOMS or DOMS for short.
But what most people don't know is that muscle
soreness or the soreness that you feel after
your workout is actually not a result of damage
to the actual muscle tissue itself.
But actually is the result of connective tissue
damage.
So, in reality, muscle soreness has little
to nothing to do with how effective or ineffective
your workout was.
And I would suggest simply not paying attention
to it from now on.
And, you know, there's a lot of things that
are going to affect how sore or not sore you
get after your workout, you know.
The first is your experience level.
You know, if you're new to weight training,
if it's a new stimulus for your body, you'll
find that in the first few weeks or months
of training, you're going to get very sore
after your workouts.
And as you gain more experience, and more
training under your belt, you'll find that
you get less and less sore as you go on.
In addition, certain muscle groups will get
more sore than others.
You know, generally, I find for me anyway,
my chest generally gets sore pretty easily,
whereas, you know, my biceps or my cabs don't
get very sore.
And in addition, there's a lot of activities
that have nothing to do with body building,
that can make you very sore.
I mean, if I was to stand here in front of
this camera right now, and do 1,000 jumping
jacks, you can guarantee I'm going to wake
up tomorrow and my quads are going to be very
sore.
But, you know, what do you think is more effective,
standing here doing 1,000 jumping jacks or
going and doing heavy sets of squats?
I mean, the answer is pretty obvious there.
So, when you're trying to ask yourself, did
I or did I not have a successful workout?
Just throw the muscle soreness issue out the
window.
It means nothing.
It's useless, okay?
If you -- if you want to know if you had a
successful workout, there's really only two
main things that buzzes really loud that you
need to pay attention to.
The first is your training intensity, you
know, muscle growth is an adaptive response
to stress.
So, in order to stimulate new muscle growth,
you need to give your body a damn good reason
to do so.
So, you know, I recommend generally training
to concentric muscular failure or very close
to it.
If you don't push that intensity threshold
far enough, your body has no incentive to
grow.
And the second thing is progressive overload.
So, every single week that you go to the gym,
you need to be pushing the envelope a little
bit further by either doing more reps with
the same weight on a given exercise or adding
more weight to the bar.
And it's those gradual increases that you
make over time that are going to add up to
big muscle gains over the long term.
So, again, just forget about the soreness
issue, put all of your focus on progressive
overload.
That really is the key to a successful muscle
building workout.
So, I hope you found this video lesson useful.
In order to get your free muscle building
workout plan, that includes all of the days
you need to spend in the gym, the exercises,
the sets, the reps, the advanced techniques,
just head over to MuscleGainTruth.com.
The link is in the description box.
And also make sure to join the Muscle Gain
Truth Facebook fan page, that link is in the
description box as well.
So, thanks for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.