What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.
SeanNal.com and in this video today we’re
talking about a subject that I don’t think
it gets discussed often enough but it’s
one that actually a crucial part of a properly
structured fitness program, and that is the
issue of injury prevention.
Always remember that when you go to the gym
and you are training hard, you're lifting
heavy, you're striving for progressive overload
from week to week, you're not just stressing
your muscles; your joints and connective tissues
are also taking a beating as well.
And that stress can very quickly add up overtime
and it can lead to real problems if you aren’t
careful and if you're not taking the proper
injury prevention steps.
So, building muscle and preventing injuries
both go hand-in-hand because your entire ability
to make those ongoing size and strength gains
hinges on the fact that your joints are healthy
enough for you to do so in the first place.
And it might not seems like a big deal right
now, but trust me, when you end up on the
sidelines with an injured lower back, injured
shoulder, elbow, knee, wrists or whatever
else, you'll really quickly wished you're
taking this area of your program more seriously.
And it’s so easy to take it for granted
when you're healthy and when you don’t have
any issues, but once you're injured you'll
feel very differently about it.
This is especially true when you consider
that some injuries can potentially throw your
program off for several months, several years,
or even permanently in more extreme cases.
And on top of this, also remember that your
goal here isn’t just to be in a gym for
the next six months or the next two years
of five years or even ten years.
If bodybuilding and fitness is something you're
adopting as part of your overall lifestyle
and you want to stay in great shape for the
long haul then this is something that you're
going to be doing for the rest of your life.
So, keep that in mind.
You want to be training in a healthy state
for life, so keeping those joints and those
connective tissues healthy should be treated
as a primary concern.
So, here are seven tips you should be implementing
into your program in order to minimize your
chances for injury.
Following these tips doesn’t guarantee that
you'll never get injured.
Most people who train seriously over the long
term will encounter at least a few minor injuries
along the way, but it will reduce the chances
by quite a bit.
So, tip number one for preventing injuries
before you even jump into your actual workout
is to perform a proper warmup first.
For most average lifters out there, a pre
workout warmup is usually nothing more than,
maybe, a few light reps before the first main
exercise at best and in a lot of cases the
warmup process get skipped altogether but
it was something I would highly advice against
because a well-rounded warmup routine is a
highly effective way to minimize your injury
risk.
It'll prepare both your mind and your body
for the workout ahead by increasing core temperature,
improving joint mobility, joint lubrication
and getting your muscles and your nervous
system firing in preparation for those heavier
weights to come.
Now, there are a lot of different ways that
an effective warmup can potentially be done.
It should only take about ten to fifteen minutes
of your time to complete.
I like to use a mix of certain dynamic movements,
a bit of self myofascial release.
So that could be with a foam roller or a ball
or something along those lines.
And then most importantly a few weight acclamation
sets before the first main compound exercise
of the workouts.
So that’s where you're going to start off
with a really light weight for higher reps,
and then gradually increase the weight while
lowering the reps to acclimate yourself up
to your first working set.
And I’ll put two links in the description
box below that you can check out from some
previous post that I did, one that shows a
good well-rounded lower body warmup that you
can use and one that uses an upper body warmup
as well.
Tip number two, a pretty simple tip on a surface
but once you start diving into each individual
exercise it gets a lot more detailed, that’s
to make sure that you're performing all of
your exercises using proper technique and
that you're not going excessively heavy on
your sets.
Now, this should pretty much go without saying
but the bottom-line here is that if you're
not able to lift the weight through a full
range of motion while using correct form throughout
the entire set and without the assistance
of a spotter then the weight is just too heavy
for you (period) and it needs to be lightened
up.
Heaving around huge amounts of weight using
a lot of momentum and sloppy technique, that’s
probably the single biggest cause of weight
training injuries.
It will significantly increase the strain
on your joints and your connective tissues
throughout the workout.
And even though you might not run into any
problems in the short term; you might be fine
for a few months or even a few years, it’s
pretty much a guarantee that consistent ego
lifting will take its toll eventually.
So, if you're serious about building a great
physique and maintaining it for years to come,
remember, this is a lifelong endeavor.
It’s critical that you keep your ego in
check.
That you learn the proper form for each exercise
and that you stick only with weights that
you can handle while maintaining complete
control at all times.
And also keep in mind, as you're striving
for progressive overload, anytime you increase
the weight on a certain lift your technique
should always stay the same each time.
If you ever sacrificing form in order to add
more weight then you're just trying to move
too quickly and you need to slowdown and be
a bit more patient with things.
And when I talk about performing your exercises
with proper technique, I really mean proper
technique, not just glancing at some quick
ten seconds tutorial online and then jumping
straight into those heavier sets.
You really need to go through a properly research
each individually exercise you're doing because,
especially on your compound lifts, there ara
a lot of smaller subtleties involved that
tend to get overlooked but that can make a
big difference in terms of minimizing injury
risk.
So little things like tucking you elbows and
retracting your scapula during bench presses,
bracing your core properly during squats,
preventing lower back rounding(?) on dead
lifts, keeping your wrists neutral on lateral
raises; these are just a few examples of many
that a lot of lifters, especially beginners,
just aren’t aware of.
So along with moderating the actual weights
you're lifting also make sure to go through
each exercise in your plan an research the
proper technique in detail because that can
really pay dividends for you over the long
term.
And not only that is going to help you minimize
the stress on your joints but it will also
go along the way in helping you maximize the
effectiveness of each exercise, just from
muscle standpoint as well.
Tip number three to prevent injury is to moderate
your overall training intensity and keep it
within the appropriate limits.
So that means performing the majority of your
sets, I would say no further than about one
to two reps short of failure and also limiting
or completely avoiding high intensity technique;
so things like forced reps, rest-pause reps
or heavy negatives.
Occasionally going all the way to failure
or adding in a more advanced technique from
time to time isn’t going to be a problem
as long as it’s done properly and done cautiously,
but doing those things on a frequent basis
not only is it unnecessary for building muscles
but it’s also going to put your joints under
a lot more stress, not only from just a sheer
intensity itself but also from increasing
the chances of a sudden slip up when you're
trying to squeeze up those extra reps when
you're in that highly fatigue state at the
very end of a set.
One to two reps short of failure is a good
level of intensity that’s going to be high
enough to stimulate hypertrophy and strength
gains, but without putting excessive stress
on your joints.
Tip number four when it comes to preventing
injuries along with moderating your intensity
level on each set, you also want to moderate
your total training volume and frequency for
the week.
So even if you are stopping the majority of
your sets one to two reps short of failure,
just doing too many total sets in general
can also lead to problems if you aren’t
careful.
Now, every person is going to tolerate weight
training a bit differently depending on certain
factors like genetics, their body types, experience
level, their nutrition, things like that;
but directly hitting each muscle groups somewhere
between about one and a half to three times
per week, performing around thirty to sixty
total reps per week for small muscle groups,
about sixty to a hundred reps for larger muscle
groups, that's generally a pretty good muscle
building range in most cases.
Some people can go a bit higher, especially
if it’s for a temporary overreaching cycle.
But somewhere in those ranges will strike
a good balance between stimulating muscle
growth effectively but also giving your joints
and your connective tissues enough recovery
time throughout the week.
And also remember that regulating your total
training volume applies both to weight training
and to cardio as well.
Low impact cardio like walking or cycling
or swimming, those things aren’t going to
be a concern even at higher frequencies in
most cases.
But higher intensity-higher impact methods;
things like sprinting, outdoor jogging on
harder surfaces, plyometrics, even things
like hitting a heavy bag, those are going
to place your joints under a lot more stress
and so they should also be moderated as well.
Now, in terms of actual workout structure,
another injury prevention guideline that tends
to get overlooked is to make sure that your
overall selection of exercises is properly
balanced out, so that every muscle group is
being trained with equal focus and equal intensity
throughout the week.
If one set of movement pattern just being
consistently over emphasized while other ones
are being ignored then certain joint and muscular
systems can end up being pushed out of their
optimal position and optimal firing pattern.
For example, putting more focus on horizontal
pressing versus horizontal pulling, which
is a really common mistake in most training
plans, that can lead to shoulder instability.
Doing too many quad dominant movements compared
to posterior chain movements, that can lead
to issues in the knees.
Training your abs without any lower back work.
These are just a few examples out of many.
So as a general rule, each movement pattern
that you perform in your training plan should
be balanced out with an equal amount of its
opposite movement pattern.
So, again, horizontal presses should be matched
with horizintal pulls; vertical presses and
vertical pulls; compound quad movement with
compound hamstring movements, et cetera.
Tip number six, unrelated to your actual training
plan, that's to work on maitaining proper
posture just during your day-to-day life outside
of the gym.
So having a well-balanced joint and muscular
system isn’t just about what you do in the
weight room but it also has a lot to do with
your regular resting posture and your movement
patterns as well.
And this is become especially important nowadays
where people are spending hours and hours
in seated position hunched over their laptops
and their computers.
I’m guilty of this myself, constantly staring
down smartphones.
This can cause a lot of issues all throughout
the body from your head all the way down to
your ankles and your feet.
Remember that your body as a whole is interconnected
and when you develop dysfunction in one particular
area it usually has a cascading effect throughout
the rest of the system.
Now, all the details behind proper posture
and how to treat certain issues that might
come up are way beyond the scope of just this
video.
But just keep in mind that how you move or
how you don’t move your body throughout
the day has a big contributing effect on the
health of your joints and your connected tissues,
and just how efficiently your body functions
during training as well.
So being mindful of your daily posture and
movement patterns, limiting how much time
you spent sitting, taking regular breaks when
you're working, and including certain rehab
technique; things like self myofascial release,
muscle activation exercises, stretches, these
things can be really helpful when used properly
but it is something that you'll have to properly
research separately on your own depending
on your own situation.
And then tip number seven is to incorporate
regular deloads into you plan.
And I’d recommend doing a one week deload
for every six to twelve weeks of consistent
training.
That’s just where you'll either continue
training on your regular plan but you'll reduce
the weights by fifty percent or you can just
take an entire week off altogether.
And that’s going to give your joints and
your connected tissues a bit of a break and
allow them to fully recover from the previous
weeks of training and also give you a nice
mental break as an added bonus.
Now, if you do find that you're running into
issues with joint pain even though you're
following all the point in this video keep
in mind that this doesn’t necessarily mean
you’ve done anything wrong, you might have
but it doesn’t automatically mean that.
It’s definitely still possible to get injured
even if you are being really careful and it
usually just comes with the territory to a
certain degree for people who are training
seriously over the long term.
If the pain is fairly minor and it’s only
happening during a certain exercise then the
first thing you can do is to experiment with
different variations of that exercise to see
if you can find one that’s more comfortable
for you.
So that could mean switching from, like a
barbell press to a dumbbell press or a cable
press, maybe a barbell squat to a dumbbell
split squad or a hack squat, a pull-up to
a pull-down, a free weight curl to a cable
curl, these are just a few examples of many.
You can also test out a different angles and
different body positioning during those movements
to see what feels best for you.
And you can also try switching to lighter
weights and higher reps and slowing down your
lifting cadence as well while you try sort
things out.
No single exercise is a must for building
muscle and if you can find a comparable version
that still hits the targeted area but without
the added joint discomfort then you can switch
to that movement for a temporary period while
you work on treating the root cause of the
injury.
Now, in a more serious cases where the pain
pretty significant regardless of which exercise
or which rep scheme you choose then you'll
definitely be best off to just take some time
away from that movement altogether or from
the gym in general, depending on how severe
it is.
Because that way you'll be able to get the
injury properly assessed and properly treated.
If you continue to push yourself when something
is clearly off that'll almost always makes
things worse and it can have a very serious
long term consequences depending on what type
of injury you're dealing with.
So, again, just remember that building a great
physique is all about what you do in the big
picture and taking a short break from your
workouts to let yourself heal is going to
be a much smarter option than ignoring those
obvious signs and possibly setting yourself
up for bigger problems down the road.
So, minor aches and pains can sometimes be
work through as long as you're careful and
you're taking active steps to fix the root
cause of the injury separately.
But significant joint discomfort should be
taken very seriously and treated professionally
before you return to the gym.
Muscle loss won’t kick in until about two
full weeks of inactivity and even then it’s
a slow process after that.
So think a bigger picture and if you know
in your gut that you should be taking a break
then chances are you're probably right.
So, hope you guys find this advice helpful.
Make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos if you did find it helpful.
If you want to grab a complete step-by-step,
science based muscle building and fatloss
program to maximize your result in the gym;
the meal plans, workout plans, supplement
guides, everything laid out in a simple structured
format then you can check out my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by heading over
to www.BTBluePrint.com using the link in the
description box below.
You can follow me on facebook and Instagram
as well if you aren’t already, the links
for that are also in the description box.
And the official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
where you can access all of my latest blog
post and other updates.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.