What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.SeanNal.com and in this
video today I’m going to be discussing what
I believe is the single biggest rip off currently
in the bodybuilding supplement industry.
Now, there are a lot of supplements out there
that are ineffective or waste of money, some
that are potentially unsafe, but the reason
why this particular supplement is now number
one on my list is because of its ineffectiveness
relative to how popular it is.
Meaning that it almost certainly isn’t going
to help you build muscle, it could even be
counterproductive, which I’ll talk about
in a second, and yet millions and millions
of dollars are just spent on it.
Supplement companies continue to aggressively
market it.
And it is one of the most common supplements
that people use nowadays.
Now, because it’s so popular I already know
that this video is going to get a bunch of
dislikes from people out there who believe
that they're benefitting from it or who have
a sort of emotional investment in it because
of all the money they’ve spent on it over
the years, but when it all comes down to it
my only goal here is to help out my viewers
and subscribers to give the objective facts
and to make your fitness program as efficient
and as cost effective as possible.
I have no emotional or financial stake in
this advice.
I'm basing this on concrete research and on
firsthand experience, so it is what it is.
So without further ado, the single biggest
bodybuilding supplement rip off right now,
in my opinion, are BCAAs, Branched-Chain Amino
Acids.
BCAAs from food sources were useful but BCAAs
in supplemental form are not.
As a standalone supplement they don’t build
muscle, they're not cheap and millions and
millions of people continue to purchase them
every month.
Right now as we speak, somewhere out there
is a bodybuilding newbie being convinced by
a supplement store salesmen to spend forty
dollars on watermelon flavored BCAAs that
he really doesn’t need.
It’s very sad.
I actually had a video on this last year where
I broke down step-by-step exactly why I don’t
think they're necessary.
And that’s because as long as you're eating
enough total dietary protein for the day as
a whole, around 0.8 grams per pound of bodyweight,
you're already getting all of the branched-chain
amino acids that you need to maximize protein
synthesis.
And just dumping more and more BCAAs on top
of that isn’t going to give you any super
benefit.
There's a finite cap on how much muscle your
body can build in a given day.
There's a finite cap on how much protein synthesis
can be elevated.
And you can reach that cap just through regular
food alone and once that cap is reached additional
supplementation is futile at that point.
It doesn’t do anything except make your
bank account smaller, basically.
Now, the reason why I'm revisiting this topic
again is because of a new meta analysis that
was published recently, which basically just
means combing the data from multiple studies
to reach an overall conclusion.
And not surprisingly it basically confirms
what I've been saying on this and what a lot
of other people have been saying as well,
which is that BCAAs essentially have no anabolic
properties when you take them in isolated
form as a supplement.
And not only that but this analysis actually
shows that it’s possible that they might
even produce muscle loss.
That would be to a very small degree, but
it is interesting regardless.
And I’ll link this in the description box
below if you do want to check it out.
To put it in simple terms, L-Leucine, which
is one of three BCAAs and is usually, treated
as the most important one because it’s one
of the main trigger of protein synthesis.
L-Leucine does trigger protein synthesis but
the problem is that without the other essential
amino acids there your body has no raw material
to actually build new muscle mass.
So taking BCAAs without other amino acids
is kind of like a construction team showing
up to build a house but not having any tools
or bricks or woods to actually build it.
Nothing useful is going to come out of that.
Or the other thing that might happen is that
protein synthesis gets stimulated in a given
muscle but since there's no other amino acids
around to be used for growth, the body will
actually break down other muscle groups to
get the amino acids that it needs.
So maybe you take your BCAAs and you train
your chest, protein synthesis is stimulated
in your pecs and then your body breaks down
muscle in your shoulders to get the amino
acids that it needs to build your chest.
So if you're taking pre-workout or intra-workout
BCAAs in isolation every time you train, you're
probably just running in circles because it’s
not giving you a nett gain in muscle growth.
And for that reason, at this point I don’t
even recommend taking BCAAs for fasted training
anymore.
I just don’t see what use they really have.
And to quote the research, it says, “We
can conclude from these two studies that BCAA
infusion not only fails to increase the rate
of muscle protein synthesis in human subjects,
but actually reduces the rate of muscle protein
synthesis and the rate of muscle protein turnover.
The catabolic state was not reversed to an
anabolic state in either study.”
So if anything if you're wanting to train
fasted or you're doing intermittent fasting,
you're actually better off to just ditch the
BCAAs altogether and to consume a blend that
contains all of the essential amino acids
instead.
But if you do that and you're technically
not training fasted anymore anyway, you might
as well just have a small serving of lean
protein or a scoop of whey protein or some
other protein powder.
Now, some people are going to say, why not
just take the BCAAs and have them along side
regular dietary protein, because that way
your body gets the increase in protein synthesis
from the BCAAs and then has the extra amino
acids that it needs to use for muscle growth.
But the thing is, if you're eating regular
dietary protein to begin with, you're already
getting the BCAAs that you need from that.
So a BCAA supplement still isn’t going to
be necessary.
So basically, either you take BCAAs in isolation
and you stimulate protein synthesis but get
no actual growth, since there's no other amino
acids there to build the muscle, or at worst
you stimulate breakdown in other muscle groups
to get the amino acids, or you just eat regular
whole food protein and you get the BCAAs to
stimulate protein synthesis form that plus
the other amino acids that you need to build
muscle.
And your other muscle groups are left alone
as well.
I think that’s pretty clear and a pretty
obvious choice.
So, the bottom-line here is that based on
the research and just the logic behind all
of this, BCAAs don’t appear to have any
real use for muscle building purposes and
at worst they could even be very slightly
counterproductive.
If you're eating enough total protein for
the day as a whole then you're already getting
more than enough to maximize protein synthesis.
And if you're training fasted or doing intermittent
fasting, taking BCAAs in isolation doesn’t
really seem to have any use either.
Now I know there's going to be a bunch of
comments where people basically say that I'm
full of shit because they use BCAAs and it
worked for them, but I just point out that
even if BCAAs were theoretically effective,
the benefits would be small enough to where
it would be very hard, if not impossible,
to clearly notice them and to be able to pin
down that it was specifically the BCAAs that
were actually improving your results, okay?
Muscle growth is a very slow and very gradual
process, and any supplement that improve muscle
growth slightly over the long term, it’s
going to be almost impossible to isolate its
effectiveness, unless you're living in a vacuum
and you're tracking every single variable
of your lifestyle, your training, nutrition
and your supplementation.
For example, let's assume a realistic rate
of muscle growth for a relative beginner of
around one pound per month.
And let's say BCAAs increased your gains by
twenty percent, which is hugely generous to
being with, that would mean that over the
course of ten months you’d gain an extra
two pounds of muscle.
So with BCAAs you’d get twelve pounds of
muscle growth and without them you would get
ten pounds.
There's no realistic way that you're going
to be able to specifically track that or know
that the BCAAs were responsible.
Or know that the gains you've got were greater
with them than they would’ve been without
them.
Especially if you were a beginner, and especially
considering all the different factors that
are involved in your program.
And then if you're more advanced, muscle growth
is happening even more slowly at that point.
In which case it’s going to be virtually
impossible to decipher.
So for that reason, when it comes to supplements
like this, you have to rely on logic and reasoning
and concrete research to make these supplement
decisions.
Because the effects are so small and so long
term, so if you did take something like BCAAs
and in a few weeks or even a couple months
you'd think you’ve gain more muscle, there's
virtually a one hundred percent chance that
that is just a simple placebo effect.
It’s in your head and it’s not based on
reality, it’s placebo.
Supplements that have more immediate effects
like creatine, because of the water weight
gain or certain pre-workout compounds that
works within thirty minutes of taking them,
those you can pin down more accurately.
But BCAAs are not something that you're going
to notice from week to week.
So doing proper research is going to be your
best bet here.
But anyway guys, that's pretty much all I
wanted to say.
BCAAs are hugely popular but that doesn’t
mean that they're effective.
There are tons of things that masses can be
influenced to follow that turnout to be incorrect.
And the evidence overwhelmingly shows that
BCAAs are most likely a waste of money as
long as you're eating enough dietary protein.
A few basic supplements can be useful to maximize
your overall progress: protein powders, creatine,
fish oil, certain vitamins and minerals, certain
pre-workout compounds, but BCAAs just aren’t
one of them and I'd highly encourage you to
save your money, because it could be put to
a much better use.
So I hope you guys found this advice helpful.
If you appreciate this no non-sense, science
based approach when it comes to building muscle
and losing fat, then you can check out my
complete Body Transformation Blueprint by
clicking the icon at the top of the screen
here, or by heading over to www.BTBluePrint.com
using the link in the description box.
That program will give you all the tools you
need to optimize your results, the workouts,
the meal plans, the supplement guides and
one-on-one coaching.
If you enjoyed the video, as always, make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos.
You can check out my official blog over at
www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on Instagram and Facebook
if you aren’t already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.