The flat barbell bench press is probably 
the most popular upper body exercise.
This is probably quite justified,  
it's a time-tested and highly 
effective muscle and strength builder.
As examined previously at House of 
Hypertrophy, the current literature  
demonstrates the flat barbell bench press 
is highly effective for chest hypertrophy.  
Moreover, the current data indicates the 
barbell bench press may near equivalently  
and significantly develop the upper, 
middle, and lower chest regions.
The push-up is also a 
well-known upper-body exercise.
However, when directly compared to the 
bench press for muscle hypertrophy,  
it's far from uncommon for individuals to 
assume the bench press is considerably superior.
In this video, we're going to examine 
the validity of this assumption,  
is the bench press truly superior to 
the push-up for muscle hypertrophy?
To do this, we'll thoroughly examine 
the existing literature comparing the  
push-up and bench press, including 
both longitudinal and acute studies.
To kick things off, there are currently two 
longitudinal studies comparing the bench  
press and push-up for increasing 
measures of muscle hypertrophy.
The first was conducted by two Japanese 
researchers, named Kikuchi and Nakazto, in 2017.
18 young men with at least a year of 
resistance training experience were  
allocated into a bench press or push-up group.
Both groups trained twice per week for 8 weeks.
Each session, the bench press group 
trained the flat barbell bench press  
for 3 sets of repetitions to failure (the point 
at which no more repetitions can be performed)  
with a 40% one-rep max load, using 
2 minutes of rest between sets.
The push-up group, each session, utilized a 
push-up variation that was roughly equivalent in  
resistance to a 40% one-rep max bench press load. 
For some subjects, this meant a regular push-up,  
whereas for others this was 
some kneeling push-up variation.
Regardless of the push-up variation 
used, the movement was carried out  
for 3 sets of repetitions to failure, 
using 2 minutes of rest between sets.
Before going any further, some viewers may be 
scratching their heads at the 40% one-rep max  
resistance used for both exercises. Perhaps 
you're thinking this study is completely  
flawed because a 40% one-rep max load is surely 
suboptimal for provoking muscle hypertrophy.
However, you'd be wrong. There's now 
extensive literature demonstrating  
that a wide range of loads are 
similarly effective for hypertrophy.
A network meta-analysis by Lopez et 
al. combined the findings of 24 studies  
and observed similar muscle hypertrophy 
between light, moderate, and heavy loads.
Differences in sex, training status, or the 
muscle examined did not alter these findings.
Upon deeper inspection of the included studies,  
much of them had subjects train with loads 
ranging from 30% to 80% one-rep max. Moreover,  
subjects executed their repetitions at least 3 
or fewer repetitions from the point of failure.
Consequently, we have high-quality 
evidence to suggest so long as  
repetitions are performed 3 or 
fewer from the point of failure,  
training with loads between 30% and 80% 
one-rep max produces similar hypertrophy.
Therefore, the 40% one-rep max resistance used in 
the Kikuchi and Nazakata study, which remember,  
had subjects perform repetitions to failure, 
is perfectly acceptable for hypertrophy.
Returning to the study's details, before 
and after the 8-week training duration,  
pectoralis major thickness was evaluated at the 
region between the third and fourth ribs, while  
triceps and biceps thickness was each evaluated 
at approximately 60% of the upper arm bone length.
The researchers found increases 
in pectoralis major and triceps  
thickness were similar between the 
bench press and push-up groups.
However, biceps thickness only significantly 
increased in the bench press group.
This finding is quite intriguing. Most 
people would presume that neither the  
bench press nor push-ups should grow the biceps,  
as they act as an antagonistic muscle, 
not agonist, during these exercises.
What could explain this finding?
I'm not entirely certain, but the barbell bench 
press necessitates a fair degree of stabilization  
to smoothly move the barbell, perhaps the biceps 
actively contract to some degree to contribute  
towards this stabilization, thereby explaining 
its measurable enhancements in thickness.
Nevertheless, for the agonist muscles (at 
least the pectoralis major and triceps),  
the findings of this study indicate 
with all other training variables equal,  
the push-up can produce similar growth 
to the flat barbell bench press.
Let's swiftly move on to the second 2018 study 
by Kotarsky et al. conducted in North Dakota.
23 men between the ages of 18 and 45, with 
2-6 months of resistance training experience,  
were assigned into a bench press or push-up group.
Both groups trained three 
times per week for 4 weeks.
The bench press group performed the flat barbell 
bench press with a load they could complete for  
3 sets of 6 repetitions. Over the following 
sessions, once they could successfully complete  
3 sets of 8 repetitions with this 
load for 2 consecutive sessions,  
they increased the load by 4.5kg and reverted 
to performing 3 sets of 6 repetitions.
The push-up group had access 
to numerous push-up variations,  
ordered according to difficulty level, and 
divided into double-arm or single-arm variations.
If a subject could perform any of the single-arm 
variations for 3 sets of 3 repetitions,  
they commenced training with this 
variation. If not, they commenced  
training with a double-arm variation they 
could execute for 3 sets of 6 repetitions.
For those using a single-arm variant, 
over the following sessions, once they  
successfully progressed to performing it for 3 
sets of 4 repetitions for 2 sessions in a row,  
they progressed to performing the next level 
while reverting to using 3 sets of 3 repetitions.
For those using a double-arm variant, 
over the following sessions, once they  
successfully progressed to performing it for 3 
sets of 8 repetitions for 2 sessions in a row,  
they progressed to performing the next 
level. If this next level was still  
a double-arm variation, they 
used 3 sets of 6 repetitions,  
whereas if it was a single-arm variation, 
they used 3 sets of 3 repetitions.
Before and after the 4-week training 
duration, thickness of the pectoralis  
major at 60% of the distance between the 
collar bone and nipple was evaluated.
Curiously, neither group experienced 
statistically significant increases  
in pectoralis major thickness. Despite this, 
the numerical mean increased in both groups.
This could be due to a couple of reasons. Firstly, 
the study was only 4 weeks, which is a very short  
duration. A longer duration would probably 
result in statistically significant findings.
Secondly, as is unfortunately the case with most 
resistance training studies, the sample size was  
small. Small sample sizes can impact the ability 
to detect changes between and within groups.
Nevertheless, despite it not being 
classified as statistically significant,  
the numerical mean for pectoralis major 
thickness did increase in both groups.
Intriguingly, the percentages favor the push-up 
group. We can't read into this too much,  
simply because as noted, it wasn't statistically 
significant, and the sample sizes were small.  
Perhaps these percentages differences 
are simply explained by the push-up  
group containing subjects, on average, 
with a higher responsivity to training,  
rather than the push-up being superior 
to the bench press for muscle growth.
What we can probably conclude from this study, on 
the other hand, is that the bench press evidently  
did not display considerable superiority 
versus the push-up for muscle hypertrophy.
To summarize thus far, one 
paper by Kikuchi and Nakazato  
established that with all other 
training variables equivalent,  
push-ups produced alike growth of the 
pectoralis major and triceps to bench pressing.
Another study by Kotarsky et al., despite being 
quite a limited study with notable considerations,  
at the very least suggests the bench press was  
evidently not considerably superior to 
the push-up for pectoralis major growth.
If we were to combine these findings 
with other acute data and reasoning,  
and it seems in all likelihood, push-ups likely 
have the capacity to produce similar hypertrophy  
of the pectoralis major, triceps, and 
anterior deltoid to the bench press.
For one, the push-up and bench 
press are biomechanically alike.  
Both involve shoulder horizontal flexion and 
extension, as well as elbow flexion and extension.
On top of this, the degree of 
range of motion that occurs is  
probably quite comparable between the two 
exercises. With a barbell bench press,  
the bar travels from a position of elbow lockout 
to a position where it contacts the chest region.  
Comparably, a regular push-up requires 
you to lower from a position of elbow  
lockout to a position where the chest 
region contacts the ground surface.
Considering these aforementioned points, its 
unsurprising acute electromyographic studies have,  
for the most part, found push-ups and 
bench pressing elicit similar muscle  
excitation of the agonistic 
muscles when load-equated.
For those unaware, electromyographic studies 
(specifically surface electromyographic studies)  
strap up electrodes to a muscle to 
record its excitation during an exercise.
Remember, muscle fibers activate via electrical 
signals received from the nervous system.  
In essence, electromyography measures the 
electrical signals delivered to a muscle's fibers,  
we call this muscle excitation.
Many people, including myself in the past, have 
mistakingly stated electromyographic studies  
measure muscle activation. Although muscle 
excitation does precede muscle activation,  
there are intermediate steps within 
the process that means it's not  
sensible to call muscle activation 
and muscle excitation the same thing.
With that out the way,  
let's briefly review the current electromyographic 
studies comparing the bench press and push-up.
A 2020 Canadian study by Alizadeh et al. 
found between a bodyweight push-up and an  
equivalently loaded flat barbell bench press, both 
performed with the same hand-spacing distance,  
excitation of the pectoralis major and anterior 
deltoid was similar during the concentric  
and eccentric phases of the exercises. However, 
lateral head triceps excitation seemed to be  
slightly lower during the concentric phase 
of the push-up versus the bench press.
Another 2020 study by Tillar and 
Ball had subjects perform four  
different load-equated conditions 
on the bench press and push-up.
The push-up was performed with bodyweight, 
a 10kg, 20kg, and 30kg weighted vest,  
while the flat barbell bench press was performed  
with four different loads that equated 
to each one of the push-up conditions.
Additionally, it's worth mentioning the 
push-up was performed with handles using  
a pronated grip that replicated the grip 
used during the flat barbell bench press.
Excitation of the sternal and clavicular 
pectoralis major, long and lateral  
triceps brachii, were similar between both 
exercises at each load-equated condition.  
However, anterior deltoid excitation seemed to be 
greater during the concentric phase on the bench  
press versus the concentric phase of the push-up. 
Also, medial triceps head excitation was greater  
during the eccentric phase of the bench press 
compared to the eccentric phase of the push-up.
Finally, another paper by Tillar 
used the exact same design.
This time around, excitation of all of the 
measured regions of the pectoralis major, anterior  
deltoid, and triceps was similar between the 
load-equated push-up and bench press conditions.
Therefore, considering the totality of 
the existing electromyographic literature,  
though there are some differences and 
disagreements between studies, the push-up and  
bench press seem to induce similar excitation 
of the agonistic muscles when load-equated.
Now, it's worth noting electromyographic studies, 
specifically the technique of electromyography,  
come with limitations and ample 
room for error. Furthermore,  
electromyographic data does not necessarily 
correlate with muscle hypertrophy outcomes.
Nevertheless, combining the current 
electromyographic literature with the two  
previously detailed longitudinal studies, as well 
as the fact both exercises are biomechanically  
alike, and it seems we have good grounds 
to hypothesize the push-up and bench press  
have the capacity to probably produce 
similar hypertrophy of the agnostic muscles.
Progressing further, it's worth discussing a  
potential long-term problem 
with the regular push-up.
As you get stronger and build muscle from 
the stimuli provided by your exercises,  
you're going to want to overload your exercises 
in some form in order to consistently maintain a  
high muscle-building stimulus. This 
is known as progressive overload.
With the flat barbell bench press, such overload 
can easily be accomplished. As you get stronger  
and bigger, you can increase the number of 
repetitions you perform with a given load,  
but more importantly, you also can 
increase the load you train with.
With the regular push-up, the number of 
repetitions you perform can be increased.
However, there likely comes a point 
where doing this becomes suboptimal  
for stimulating hypertrophy. Recall we 
detailed how the literature demonstrates  
loads between 30% to 80% one-rep max 
elicit similar hypertrophy outcomes,  
provided repetitions are executed 3 
or fewer from the point of failure.
As explored in a previous video, it's 
unclear if loads lighter than 30%  
one-rep max still can optimize hypertrophy. 
There are existing data suggesting it might not.
Very generally, individuals can perform 
approximately 35 repetitions with a 30%  
one-rep max load. Therefore, it follows 
that if an individual performs more than  
35 repetitions on the regular push-up, no longer 
might muscle hypertrophy be optimally stimulated.
What's the solution to this?
One solution is to progress via using 
harder and harder push-up variations.  
Recall this was the strategy 
utilized in the Kotarsky study.
There exist an array of push-up 
variations with varying difficulty levels.
For example, a 2011 study by Ebben 
et al. examined what percentage of a  
person's bodyweight they pushed during 
a few different push-up variations.
Approximately 64% of a person's body weight 
was pushed during a regular push-up. Elevating  
your hands decreased this percentage while 
elevating your feet increased this percentage.
Furthermore, a kneeling push-up required a subject 
to push approximately 49% of their body weight.
This data can aid us in figuring out 
how an individual can progressively  
overload the push-up in the long run.
In addition to these aforementioned push-up 
variations, as seen in the Kotarsky study,  
single-arm push-up variations can 
also be highly useful for individuals  
who've progressed to a level where double-arm 
variations no longer adequately challenge them.
Other potentially notable push-up variations 
include explosive push-up variations,  
such as the clap or superman push-ups,  
push-ups with handles to increase the range of 
motion, as well as push-ups with gymnastic rings.
Having detailed all of this, there 
is potentially an unforeseen concern  
when an individual progresses via using 
harder and harder push-up variations.
Namely, different push-up variations likely 
distribute your bodyweight load across the  
agnostic muscles differentially. This 
might not align with what you want.
For example, as detailed a moment ago, 
elevating your feet has you push a higher  
percentage of your body weight versus a regular 
push-up. However, it's also quite plausible  
push-ups with elevated feet shift the loading 
to your upper chest and anterior deltoids more,  
thereby possibly reducing the stimulus 
the mid to lower chest region experiences.
Additionally, many single-arm variations, 
potentially due to reduced shoulder horizontal  
flexion demands, may not recruit the chest 
to do the degree a person would want to.  
Moreover, although I'm not certain, single-arm 
variations are seemingly quite triceps dominant.
These points may be insignificant for those that  
mainly care about getting better 
and progressing with push-ups.
But for those using the 
push-up as a hypertrophy tool,  
this differential recruitment between different 
push-up variations may be slightly unideal.
Weighted push-ups can probably solve this.
Specifically, aiming to progressively 
overload the push-up via additional weights  
(either through a weighted vest, plates, plates 
in a backpack, or some other method) can likely  
be highly effective for making the push-up a 
stable and solid muscle hypertrophy stimulus.
Recall earlier we presented two studies 
by Tillar that found weighted push-ups,  
for the most part, managed to elicit alike muscle  
excitation of the agonistic muscles 
to equivalently loaded bench pressing.
Now, in theory, there could come a point where 
weighted push-ups become slightly less practical.
Namely, performing 50-70kg weighted 
push-ups is probably feasible,  
but, beyond this point, it may become 
tricky to practically use heavier loads.
However, there still exist solutions.
Adding in paused repetitions, using deficit 
style push-ups to increase the range of motion,  
or even something like gymnastic rings can 
be tools to further progressive overload.
Additionally, although 
potentially more triceps dominant,  
working on weighted single-arm push-ups variations 
would plausibly still be a great stimulus  
for the pectoralis major and anterior deltoid.
It's also worth noting again that repetitions 
up to 35, so long as they are executed 3 of  
fewer repetitions from failure, are similarly 
effective for stimulating muscle hypertrophy.
As a result, progressing heavily 
weighted push-ups into the higher rep  
ranges will likely still be powerful 
for stimulating muscle hypertrophy.
For example, let's say you've worked up to 
performing 50kg weighted push-ups for sets  
of 8 repetitions, and you wish to no longer add 
further external load as it isn't practical.  
From here, your new goal might be to hit sets of 
30 repetitions with this 50kg weighted push-up.
The main point I'm attempting to illustrate 
here is that although the bench press is far  
simpler to progressive overload in the long run,  
there are many routes in which an individual 
can successfully overload the push-up long-term.
Before closing out the video, I think there are 
some other interesting things worth mentioning.
The literature implies the push-up has a 
fantastic carry-over to bench press strength.
We've already overviewed the details of 
the Kikuchi and Nakazato, as well as the  
Kotarsky studies. Yet, I haven't mentioned that 
in both of these studies, one-repetition max on  
the flat barbell bench press was evaluated 
before and after the training durations.
In both studies, increases in this measure were  
statistically similar between the 
push-up and bench press groups.
However, the percentage increases seem to 
meaningfully favor the bench press group.  
I think it's probably likely 
the small sample sizes in both  
studies compromised the ability to 
detect this change as significant.
The reason I say this is because it's 
of course very logical training the  
bench press is what would increase 
your bench press strength the most.
Even so, the data nevertheless demonstrates the 
push-up respectably improves bench press strength.
What about the reverse of this?
How well does bench press training 
carry over to push-up performance?
Let us briefly return to the Kotarsky study.  
Remember, they used a variety of push-up 
variations. Before and after the study, both  
the push-up and bench press groups were tested 
on which level they could comfortably perform.
By the end of the study, the push-up group managed  
to increase the level they could 
comfortably perform significantly,  
while although the bench press group also 
increased the level they could execute,  
it was much smaller in magnitude and statistically 
significantly less than the push-up group.
Hence, although bench press 
training can help push-up strength,  
it may not produce pronounced increases.
Although it's worth remembering this 
Kotarsky study was only 4 weeks in duration,  
longer durations may change this.
Generally, I think it's probably quite 
likely bench press training will have  
measurable positive effects on 
push-up performance long-term.
Finally, throughout this video, we've primarily 
been discussing the similarities between the  
push-up and bench press, namely their similar 
biomechanical demands, muscle excitation,  
muscle hypertrophy, and carry-over potential.
But, there still are notable 
differences between these two exercises.
The push-up likely recruits and 
develops the abdominal muscles to  
a greater extent than the 
flat barbell bench press.
Illustrating this, a 2014 study by 
Calatayud et al. found that a regular  
push-up produced significantly greater 
excitation of the rectus abdominis and  
external oblique versus the flat barbell bench 
press performed with an 85% one-rep max load.
These findings are logical. A push-up gets 
you into a plank position that necessitates  
abdominal recruitment to support and stabilize the 
trunk. Opposingly, the flat barbell bench press  
has you rest your trunk on a bench, meaning the 
abdominal muscles need not be recruited as much.
In addition to this, the push-up 
likely does a superior job to the  
bench press for developing the serratus anterior.
One of the functions of the serratus anterior 
is the protraction of the shoulder blades.
During a well-executed push-up, the shoulder 
blades move freely throughout the movement.  
Specifically, the shoulder blades 
retract during the lowering phase  
and protract during the lifting phase, 
enabling serratus anterior recruitment.
Conversely, a well-executed flat barbell 
bench press typically has your shoulder  
blades retracted and pinned down into 
the bench, meaning no protraction occurs.
That brings us to the end of the video.
To make everything crystal clear, let's 
establish a few key takeaway points: 
Combining the electromyographic literature 
with the two longitudinal studies,  
as well as the biomechanical similarities 
between the push-up and bench press,  
and we seem to have good grounds 
to hypothesize both exercises  
likely have the capacity to produce similar 
hypertrophy of the agonistic muscles. 
Overloading the bench press in the long-term 
is simple, the load can be increased. 
On the other hand, the push-up is a 
little more tricky to overload long-term. 
One solution is to progress via using 
harder and harder push-up variations.  
Although, a potential concern with this is 
that the different push-up variations may  
differentially distribute the load amongst the 
agonistic muscles. For some, this may be unideal. 
Probably the best resolution to this 
is to train with weighted push-ups. 
Current data implies the push-up has a great 
carryover to bench press strength. Whether the  
reverse of this is true isn't entirely clear.
Despite there being many similarities between  
the two exercises, there are some 
noteworthy differences. The push-up  
recruits the abdominals and serratus anterior to 
a greater extent than the barbell bench press. 
Finally, although we've been directly comparing 
the bench press to the push-up in this video.  
It's important to remember in the real world, 
you do necessarily have to pick between either.  
Both can successfully be 
performed in a training plan.