Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in today’s
video I want to share 12 effective tips that
you can employ to minimize the amount of hunger
that you experience during a fat loss diet,
and in turn maximize your chances of long
term success.
So, regardless of what type of dieting method
that you employ or how your training plan
is specifically structured, fat loss ultimately
comes down to one central thing, and that
is maintaining a net calorie deficit over
time by consistently burning more calories
than you consume.
And the fact is simple, when your daily caloric
expenditure consistently exceeds your caloric
intake, your body is going to naturally kick
into survival mode and produce feelings of
hunger in order to motivate you to eat, and
food cravings are the number one reason why
most people ultimately fall off track with
their fat loss diet and end up failing in
the long run.
So although these 12 tips are not going to
completely eliminate your hunger altogether,
they will make a very significant positive
difference when it comes to reducing them
down to a more manageable level.
So let's go over it.
Tip #1 is to Maintain A Small Calorie Deficit
And Focus On Losing Fat At A Gradual Pace.
This is the most basic and most obvious tip
for you to employ, but it's also the most
important.
Create too large of a calorie deficit and
not only will you lose an excessive amount
of lean muscle mass throughout your cutting
phase, but you’re also going to feel excessively
hungry as well.
Always think of fat loss as being more of
a marathon rather than a sprint, and focus
on creating a small calorie deficit that gradually
strips the fat away while allowing you to
maintain your lean muscle mass and while keeping
your hunger levels relatively controlled.
And a good guideline to follow for this is
to employ a calorie deficit of around 15-20%
below your maintenance level, and aiming to
lose about 1-2 pounds of total body fat per
week.
Tip #2 is to Make Sure You’re Getting Enough
Protein.
Protein is the most filling of the 3 macronutrients
and it also plays an important role in helping
you spare lean muscle tissue as you diet down.
A good guideline here is to aim for around
1 gram of protein per pound of body weight
daily from lean, high quality sources.
Tip #3, Don’t Let Your Dietary Fat Intake
Drop Too Low.
The idea that “dietary fat makes you fat”
is one of the biggest myths when it comes
to proper fat loss nutrition, and maintaining
adequate fat intake is a very important aspect
of your overall plan.
Not only does a sufficient amount of dietary
fat help to keep your testosterone levels
from dipping too low throughout your cut,
but it will also leave you feeling fuller
and more satisfied in between meals by slowing
down the rate of gastric emptying.
And for those reasons, I would recommend that
you aim to get at least 20% of your total
daily calories from fat.
Tip #4 is to ensure That You’re Eating Plenty
Of Fiber.
Fiber absorbs water as it moves through your
digestive tract and essentially “gels”
and expands in your stomach to increase feelings
of fullness and satiety.
And just like fat, fiber also slows down the
rate of gastric emptying.
And a good guideline here is to shoot for
about 15 grams of fiber for every 1000 calories
that you consume.
Tip #5, Eat More Vegetables.
This somewhat overlaps with the previous point,
but vegetables are one of the very best food
sources for your fat loss diet because they’re
very high in overall volume but extremely
low in calories.
Consuming vegetables with several of your
meals throughout the day is a great way to
help fill yourself up while keeping the total
calorie content of your meals down.
Not only are vegetables a great tool for reducing
hunger, but they’re also incredibly micronutrient
dense as well.
Tip #6, Optimize Your Daily Meal Frequency
And Layout.
The research on meal frequency and its effects
on basal metabolic rate are fairly clear,
and that is thatas long as you’re consuming
the same overall calorie and macronutrient
totals for the day as a whole, the specific
way in which you lay out those meals doesn’t
really have any significant effect on your
bottom line fat loss.
And for that reason, you’re going to want
to experiment with different meal plan structures
in order to find the one that works best for
you in terms of controlling appetite.
So for some people that might mean eating
6 small meals a day, for others it might mean
4 medium sized meals, and for others it might
mean 3 larger meals.
In addition to that, some people do best by
consuming a larger percentage of their calories
earlier on in the day with fewer calories
later on, while others do better using the
exact opposite approach.
And finally, you can also consider trying
out the popular “intermittent fasting”
protocol by consuming all of your daily calories
within an 8 hour “feeding window”, and
then fasting for the remaining 16 hours of
the day.
So just play around with these different variables
and see wihch one works best for you.
Tip #7 is to Increase Your Water Intake.
So aside from drinking plenty of water throughout
the day as a whole, you can also try consuming
a couple glasses of water with each meal in
order to increase overall feelings of fullness.
Tip #8 is to Find The Right Balance Between
Dieting And Cardio.
So as I mentioned at the beginning of the
video, fat loss ultimately comes down to maintaining
a net calorie deficit over time by burning
more calories than you consume.
Now you can create a calorie deficit by consuming
less food, by increasing your activity level,
or through a combination of both.
Now both of these variables (so reducing calorie
intake or increasing calorie expenditure)
will obviously stimulate your appetite, but
everyone does react a bit differently to each
one.
Some people are able to manage their hunger
more effectively by creating a larger calorie
deficit through their diet and then performing
less cardio as a result, while others prefer
to consume more calories through their diet
but to perform a higher amount of cardio in
order to create the same overall calorie deficit.
So try playing around with each of these variables
by either consuming fewer calories and exercising
a bit less or by consuming more calories and
exercising a bit more to see which one you
prefer.
Tip #9 is to Perform Some HIIT Cardio.
Performing low intensity, longer duration
aerobic sessions is fine as part of your overall
plan, but do keep in mind that these types
of sessions tend to have a more powerful appetite-stimulating
effect than high intensity, low duration cardio
does.
And for that reason, you can try mixing in
some high intensity interval cardio into your
plan in order to burn additional calories
without experiencing a significant increase
in appetite.
Tip #10 is to Allow For Dietary Flexibility.
Trying to “eat clean” 24 hours a day is
not only completely unnecessary when it comes
to maximizing fat loss, but it’s also a
great way to ensure that you fail with your
diet over the long run.
Completely restricting a particular food item
is only going to make you desire it more,
increasing the chances that you’ll eventually
“give in”, become discouraged, and then
potentially binge even further, and ultimately
throw your entire program off course.
On the other hand, if you simply allot a small
percentage of your total daily calories to
come from the foods that you crave most right
from the outset, your chances of long term
success are going to be hugely maximized,
and with no negative effect on your fat burning
results either.
Remember, fat loss nutrition is all about
the big picture, and including a few “cheat
foods” here and there is NOT going to magically
cause you to gain fat as long as it’s being
properly tracked.
So my suggestion here is to follow the basic
rule that if 80-90% of your total calories
are coming from lean high quality protein,
minimally refined carbs and healthy fats,
then the other 10-20% can come from whatever
foods you’d like as long it fits into your
overall daily calorie and macronutrient totals.
Tip #11 is to Make Sure That You Get Enough
Sleep Each Night.
Not only does chronic sleep deprivation negatively
impact your mental focus, your physical strength,
energy levels and motivation, but it also
boosts your appetite as well, and this is
due to a decrease in leptin levels and an
increase in ghrelin levels, which are two
key hormones that regulate hunger.
Now everybody’s individual need for sleep
varies quite a bit, so I won’t give you
the standard “8 hours a night” guideline.
Instead, just aim to get enough quality sleep
each night so that you feel fully rested,
alert and energized throughout the day.
And tip #12 is to Slow Down When You Eat.
Now this is a pretty simple one, but research
has shown that eating your meals at a slower,
more gradual place helps you to feel fuller
and more satisfied off of a smaller volume
of food.
Your food isn’t going to run away, so take
your time and enjoy it.
Now again, these 12 tips are not going to
completely eliminate your food cravings altogether,
but employ some or all of them and you should
notice a significant positive effect that
will make your diet much easier to stick to
over the long term.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
To get some more highly effective fat burning
and muscle building nutrition tips, along
with step by step meal plans, recipes and
other helpful information, make sure to head
over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab
my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System, and you can do that by clicking the
icon at the top of the video or using the
link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.