Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I wanted to address the
issue of calories from vegetables and whether
or not you should be tracking them as part
of your overall diet.
Most vegetables are very low in calorie density
in comparison to other foods, and so a lot
of people ask me whether or not it’s even
necessary to track them.
So first off, just to get this out of the
way, just like all other foods, vegetables
do contain positive calories and the idea
that the calories in vegetables somehow “don’t
count” because your body supposedly expends
more energy chewing and digesting them than
the actual calories they contain, this is
a complete myth.
You will hear some people saying that but
it’s just not true.
There is energy content in vegetables and
that energy content does contribute to your
overall daily calorie intake.
So the question of whether or not you should
actually track them it basically just comes
down to your individual situation and it depends
on how precisely you’re aiming to track
your daily calories and macros, as well as
the total amount of vegetables that you’re
eating.
So if you’re someone who is very serious
about their diet and you want to be really
on point with it, so you’re trying to maintain
a reasonably tight calorie surplus or calorie
deficit, and you’re eating a decent amount
of veggies every day, then yes, you should
be tracking them because the calories do add
up quite a bit over the course of the day
and they can make a noticeable difference
to your totals.
For example if you were doing a focused cutting
phase and trying to maintain a 500 calorie
deficit, but you were also eating vegetables
3 times a day with reasonable portion sizes,
that could very easily add up to a couple
hundred calories or more per day, which is
very significant if you’re trying to lose
fat.
So if you were just eating a ton of vegetables
without tracking anything at all then that
could very easily cut your deficit in half
or more if you aren’t careful.
On the other hand if you’re not tracking
exact macros and you’re just trying to maintain
a rough overall calorie surplus or deficit,
and you’re only eating a small to moderate
amount of vegetables per day, maybe you’re
mixing in a few veggies into an omelet or
just adding some lettuce into a wrap or having
a small serving with your dinner, then the
calorie content is going to be so low that
in the big picture it’s probably really
not going to matter.
Another important factor to take into account
here is the types of vegetables that you’re
eating.
Some vegetables are actually quite a bit more
calorie dense than others and this definitely
plays a big role in how important it is to
track them.
For example, 100 grams of lettuce will give
you only 15 calories, whereas something like
kale is over 3 times higher and will give
you about 50 calories.
Another example, cucumbers are extremely low
in calories I think it's only about 10 calories
per 100 grams, whereas broccoli is closer
to about 35, and again that’s only a 100
gram serving which is not very, most people
are generally going to eat more than that,
and they're going to do it multiple times
per day, and because of that the specific
vegetable choices that you make can change
things quite a bit.
To give myself as an example on this topic,
right now I’m actually doing a 4-6 week
mini-cut to just drop about 8 pounds for summer,
and I want to get it done as quickly and efficiently
as I possibly can, and I do eat vegetables
a few times per day, so right now I’m weighing
and tracking everything that I eat and that
includes all my vegetables, because they do
account for about 125 of my total daily calories,
and so I want to make sure that I have that
under control.
On the other hand when I’m just maintaining
or when I’m trying to gain maybe a little
bit of muscle and strength, then I don’t
personally track any vegetables at all because
I’m not as concerned with trying to land
on an exact calorie goal, and so instead I’ll
just estimate things a bit more loosely.
So again there’s no black and white answer
here and it really just depends on how precise
you’re trying to be with things and what
your goals are.
However, just keep in mind that the calories
from vegetables do “count” towards your
total daily energy intake, so if you are trying
to hit a specific calorie target and you are
eating a decent amount of vegetables each
day, then you do need to be taking them into
account because the total calories will add
up over the course of the day and it could
make a measurable difference to your overall
results.
On the other hand if you’re not trying to
be as precise with your diet and you’re
not eating a huge amount of veggies each day,
then it likely won't be a big deal and it's
probably just a waste of mental effort for
you to bother tracking them.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found the information useful here today.
For more useful, science-based nutrition tips
along with training and supplementation advice
to maximize your muscle building and your
fat burning progress, make sure to head over
to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab my
complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.