Drop sets are a so-called advanced 
muscle-building technique.
Generally, a drop set involves performing 
repetitions to failure with a given load and  
then immediately reducing the load (typically 
by 15-25%) and performing repetitions to  
failure again. Typically, one to three load 
reductions are done, but more can be done.
You can also perform multiple 
drop sets for an exercise,  
separated by some rest interval duration.
A potential reason drop 
sets could build more muscle  
is that when you perform repetitions to failure 
with a given load, your muscles are technically  
not fully fatigued, as they could still 
perform repetitions with a lighter load.
By using drop sets and performing 
further repetitions to failure  
with lighter loads, you are enhancing 
the fatigue experienced by the muscle,  
potentially implying a better 
muscle-building stimulus.
However, do drop sets have 
any support in the research?
Firstly, we'll explore a 
new study by Varovic et al.
Secondly, we'll fit this study 
into the context with the rest  
of the drop set research 
and make some conclusions.
Varovic et al. recruited 16 men with 
less than 1 year of training experience.
This could technically include individuals 
with no previous training experience, but the  
researchers unfortunately provided no further 
details on whether this was actually the case.
Nevertheless, each subject randomly had one 
leg assigned to a drop set or normal condition.
Both legs were trained on 
the unilateral leg extension,  
mainly three times per week for 8 weeks.
With the normal condition leg, each 
session consisted of performing 2-5 sets  
of repetitions to failure with a 15 rep-max load.
120 seconds of rest were used between sets.
With the drop set condition leg, each drop set 
involved first performing repetitions to failure  
with a 5 rep-max load, immediately reducing the 
load by 20% and performing repetitions to failure,  
and then reducing the load one last time by 10-15% 
and performing even more repetitions to failure.
2-5 drop sets were performed per session, 
separated by 120 seconds of rest.
Vastus lateralis and rectus femoris 
thickness was each measured at 30%, 50%,  
and 70% of the muscle's respective length 
before and after the study for both legs.
At all measured regions of the vastus lateralis, 
and at 70% of the rectus femoris' length,  
increases in thicknesss were 
similar between both conditions.
However, at 30% and 50% of 
the rectus femoris' length,  
increases were greater for the drop set condition.
Therefore, it seems drop set training was better 
at growing more regions of the quadriceps.
It's potentially notable the leg extension, 
an isolation exercise, was used in this study.
Isolation exercises involve movement at one 
joint, meaning one muscle group is trained.
When looking at the rest of the 
research using isolation exercises,  
the results similarly seem 
promising for drop set training.
Fink et al. had 16 men with 
prior training experience,  
but minimally trained in the last year, perform 
the triceps pushdown twice per week for 6 weeks.
A normal group, each session, trained the 
movement with 3 sets of repetitions to failure  
with a 12 rep-max load, using 
90 seconds of rest between sets.
A drop set group, each session, performed 
repetitions to failure with a 12-rep max load,  
and then subsequently performed repetitions to 
failure with a 20% lighter load three consecutive  
times in a row. They only performed 
this single drop set in a session.
Increases in triceps cross-sectional area, 
measured at 50% of the upper arm length,  
favored the drop-set group.
These results are quite impressive.
As just noted, the drop set group only 
performed a single drop set in their session.
The normal group, opposingly, 
performed 3 sets in a session.
If the drop set group performed three of 
their drop sets, they may have experienced  
potentially even more growth, given more 
volume (in the form of sets) seems to be  
closely related to muscle growth 
(at least up to a certain point).
Another study by Okazi et al. assigned the arms 
of 9 untrained men into one of three conditions:  
a high load, light load, or drop set condition.
Subjects trained both arms with 
a unilateral dumbbell curl,  
two to three times per week for 8 weeks.
The high load condition, each session, involved 
performing 3 sets of repetitions to failure  
with an 80% one-rep max load, using 
3 minutes of rest between sets.
The light load condition, each session, involved 
performing 3 sets of repetitions to failure  
with a 30% one-rep max load, using 
90 seconds of rest between sets.
The drop set condition first involved 
performing repetitions to failure  
with an 80% one-rep max load, and then immediately 
performing subsequent repetitions to failure  
with 65, 50, 40, and 30% one-rep max loads. They 
only performed this single drop set each session.
Increases in cross-sectional area of the elbow 
flexors (which consists of the biceps and  
brachialis in this case), at 60% of the upper arm 
length, were similar between all three conditions.
Like the last study, the drop set 
conditon only performed a single drop set.  
Although, 4 load reductions were 
performed, which is quite a bit.
Nevertheless, it's plausible if they 
performed further drop sets in a session,  
growth could have been even more compared 
to the other high and light load conditions.
As for compound exercises, which are exercises 
that train two or more muscle groups thanks to  
the movement of two or more joints, the evidence 
is less promising for them with drop sets.
Angleri et al. assigned each leg of a group of 16 
men with at least 4 years of training experience  
into a drop set or normal condition.
Both legs were trained on the unilateral 
leg press and leg extension for 12 weeks.
The leg extension is of course an isolation 
exercise, but the leg press is compound.
The normal condition, each session, 
involved 3-5 sets of 6-12 repetitions  
to or very close to failure, 
using 2 mins of rest between sets.
For the drop set condition, each drop set involved 
first performing repetitions to failure with a 75%  
one-rep max load, immediately reducing the load 
by 20% and performing repetitions to failure,  
and then reducing the load one last time by 20% 
and performing even more repetitions to failure.
3-5 drop sets were performed each session, 
separated by 2-minute rest intervals.
Increases in cross-sectional 
area of the vastus lateralis,  
measured at 50% of the thigh length, 
were similar between both conditions.
Now, one limitation of this study is that 
only one region of the vastus lateralis,  
which is a large muscle, was measured.
Fortunately, this limitation is 
less so in a study by Enes et al.
18 men with at least 2 
years of training experience  
were assigned into a normal or drop set group.
Both groups trained the back squat, leg press, and 
leg extension, twice per week for 8 weeks. Again,  
the leg extension is an isolation exercise, 
but the back squat and leg press are compound.
The normal group, each session and for 
each exercise, performed 4 sets of 12  
repetitions with a 70% one-rep max load, 
using 120 seconds of rest between sets.
The drop set group, each session, involved 
performed 10 reps with a 75% one-rep max load and  
then immediately reducing the load to 55% one-rep 
max and performing a further 6 repetitions.  
3 of these drop sets were performed for each 
exercise, separated by 120-second rest-intervals.
Lateral thigh thickness (which includes 
a combination of the vastus lateralis  
and vastus intermedius) was measured at 
30%, 50%, and 70% of the thigh length.
Increases at all three measured regions 
were similar between both groups.
It's worth noting that the drop sets used in this  
study can be thought of as less 
intense than typical drop sets.
They performed a prescribed number of repetitions 
rather than training all out to failure.
They also only performed one 
load reduction per drop set.
With more intense drop set protocols, I 
think there are some potential reasons  
as to why they may not be the most 
suitable with compound exercises,  
particularly with free weight compound 
exercises like the back squat.
Firstly, as compound exercises require the 
coordinated movement of two or more joints, they  
generally require more skill and concentration 
to smoothly execute versus isolation exercises
Drop sets that involve repetitions to 
failure and multiple load reductions,  
due to their highly fatiguing nature, may 
cause a meaningful breakdown in technique.
This problem may be more relevant 
for less experienced individuals.
Secondly, central fatigue 
could potentially be an issue.
Remember, muscles produce force thanks 
to the electrical signals they receive  
from that central nervous system 
(the brain and spinal cord).
Central fatigue refers to a decrease 
in these electrical signals.  
This causes a reduction in the 
number of muscle fibers recruited  
and/or the amount of force they generate, 
something not favorable for optimal muscle growth.
Central fatigue is likely produced 
in many cases of training.
However, drop sets with compound 
exercises may produce central  
fatigue to a magnitude that could be problematic.
I speculate this for two reasons:
Firstly, the longer the muscle contraction 
duration, the more central fatigue generated.
Due to multiple load reductions,  
drop sets prolong the duration of your 
sets, and thus muscle contraction duration.
Secondly, there's some evidence to suggest the 
more muscle mass involved in an exercise, the  
more central fatigue generated. Compound exercises 
involve more muscle mass than isolation exercises.
Combine these two reasons and we 
could hypothesize that drop sets  
with compound exercises may produce central 
fatigue that interferes with the stimulus.
However, it's essential to recognize this is 
just a hypothesis. The notion that compound  
exercises generate more central fatigue is not 
completely supported by the research itself.
To conclude the video, the research on drop 
sets with isolation exercises looks promising.
1 study found that with a leg extension, 
multiple drop sets per session produced  
greater regional quadriceps 
growth than multiple normal sets.
A second study found with a triceps pushdown,  
a single drop set produced more triceps 
growth than multiple normal sets.
While a third study found with a dumbbell curl,  
a single drop set produced similar elbow 
flexor growth to multiple normal sets.
Now, in these two studies that only used single 
drop sets, it's potentially plausible that if they  
performed more drop sets per session, the results 
may have been even more favorable for drop sets.
With studies that have included compound 
exercises, drop sets appear less promising.
Two studies in which multiple drop 
sets were performed with either  
the leg press and back squat 
found no advantage with them.
As a final note, it's worth mentioning 
that in total, there are only 5 studies  
assessing drop sets and muscle growth, 
which is far from a substantial number.
The conclusions in this video are derived from my 
interpretations of this limited number of studies.
Future research could definitely come along 
and change the conclusions made in this video.