Hey, what's up? This is Sean Nalewanyj, of
EliteImpactLabs.com. And in today's video
lesson, I want to address a pretty common
question that I get asked, which is the question
of how much whey protein should I take? Now,
the answer to this question is that there
really is no set answer. Now, the key thing
to realize is this: whey protein is actually
not a supplement. Yes, it's referred to as
a supplement. It's sold in supplement stores.
But in reality, whey protein is simply a natural
component of dairy that is removed and isolated
into powdered form. So, for that reason, whey
protein is actually more accurately classified
as a convenient food product. So, if you're
asking yourself, "How much whey protein should
I take?" It's really the same thing as asking
how much chicken should I eat, how much steak
should I eat or how much fish should I eat.
There really isn't a set limit for whey protein
intake as long as it fits into your daily
protein totals. You have to keep in mind that
all protein sources are eventually broken
down into individual amino acids. And your
body has no way of telling the difference
between specific amino acids that are consumed
from different foods. Now, I'm not recommending
this. But you could in theory, get 100% of
your daily protein intake from whey if you
really wanted to, and cover all of your amino
acid needs through that one single source.
And in fact I do know of a few top natural
bodybuilders who do exactly that. Now, obviously
the vast majority of people are not going
to go with that route. They're simply going
to derive their overall protein intake from
a mix of typical bodybuilding sources like
chicken, fish, eggs, red meat, along with
their whey protein shakes. And so, for that
reason, the question of "How much whey protein
should I take?" Isn't even really worth bothering
with. Ultimately, it just comes down to your
personal food preference, your overall daily
protein requirements and how busy your schedule
is. You know, if you want to get 30% of your
protein intake from whey, that's fine. If
you want to go 50%, 75%, it's really up to
you. Personally, I consume about 200grams
of protein daily, and about half of that is
derived from whey. And like I said, that's
just me though, and your whey protein consumption
may be higher or lower than this. Now, the
other question is, is there a minimum amount
of whey protein that should be consumed daily?
Now, obviously it's certainly possible to
build muscle size and strength with typical
whole food proteins only. But the truth is
that whey protein definitely does deliver
some distinct advantages that you can't get
from other food sources. The first advantage
is that whey protein has the highest bioavailability
of any protein source available, which means
that your body is going to fully digest and
utilize the highest percentage of the total
protein content in comparison to any other
food source. Secondly, whey provides the highest
concentration of the most anabolic amino acids,
particularly L-Leucine, which is the amino
acid most heavily involved in stimulating
protein synthesis. Third, there's actually
some evidence that whey protein increases
the percentage of body fat that is used for
fuel during training sessions when it's used
as a pre-workout protein source. Fourth, whey
protein enhances immune system strength by
raising your body's levels of a powerful antioxidant
called, "Glutathione". And finally, whey protein
is the most convenient source of protein available
due to its powdered and liquid form. So, while
whey protein use is certainly not mandatory,
I definitely do think that anyone who wants
to maximize their muscle recovery and growth
should be consuming whey as a stable part
of their overall nutrition plan. So, the simple
and practical answer to the question of "How
much whey protein should I take?" Is this;
as far as the upper limit is concerned, as
long as it fits into your total daily protein
requirements, there's no practical upper limit
for whey protein consumption. Remember, whey
protein is a food and not a supplement. And
as far as a minimum recommendation, because
of its unique muscle building and fat burning
properties, I would recommend that you aim
to get at least a couple scoops of whey protein
in per day as part of your overall diet. And
for most people this will represents somewhere
around 25% of their total protein intake.
So, I hope you found this information useful.
If you do want to get your hands on one of
the highest quality forms of whey protein
available for supporting muscle growth and
recovery, I highly recommend checking out
our IsoM3 micro-filtered and ultra-filtered
whey protein isolate over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description box for that.
Also make sure to like, comment and subscribe
if you found this video helpful. And make
sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook
page, where we do free supplement giveaways
every Thursday night. So, thanks for watching
this video lesson. And I'll talk to you again
soon.