Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and today I want to explain why the concept
of just “eating healthy” is essentially
useless if your overall diet is not properly
structured in terms of at least approximate
overall calorie intake and approximate protein,
carb and fat intake.
So I get emails like this all the time where
someone who isn’t getting the results they
want will lay out what they’re eating each
day, so something like, you know for breakfast
I have a protein shake and some fruit, for
lunch I have chicken and rice with veggies,
dinner I have fish and potatoes, and then
I have some mixed nuts and yogurt before bed.
And yes that does look good on paper, but
when I ask them what the rough total calorie
content is for all the foods combined as well
as what they're roughly aiming for, most people
really have no idea.
So I’ve said this many times before in various
ways, but the reality is that it really doesn’t
matter how “healthy” you eat throughout
the day or if your diet is made up of nothing
but lean protein, fruits, vegetables and healthy
fats, if your total daily energy intake is
not consistently landing within the proper
range based on your goals, you're really NOT
going to build muscle or lose fat to any significant
degree.
Yes, for some people it is possible to gain
a small amount of muscle while in a calorie
deficit if the conditions are right, and it’s
also possible to lose a small amount of body
fat while in a calorie surplus, however, if
you have the definite goal that you want to
bulk up and put on muscle or that you want
to lean down and lose body fat - and you want
to do it to a significant degree in either
direction - then you need to be tracking and
managing your overall net energy balance to
at least an approximate degree throughout
the week if you want to see consistent measurable
results.
If you want to build muscle, then you need
to provide your body with an energy surplus
by consuming more calories than you burn,
and if you want to lean down and lose body
fat, then you need to create an energy deficit
by burning up more calories than you consume.
It's really as simple as that.
I know that this is pretty basic information,
but so many people out there still don’t
follow it and then they aren’t sure why
they aren’t making any real progress.
They’ll just look at the foods that they’re
eating over the course of the day as a whole,
they'll consider it to be a “healthy”
combination, even though in the end there
really is no absolute universal agreement
on what a “healthy diet” is anyway, but
nonetheless they'll just look at the foods
and deem them healthy and then they’ll assume
that their lack of results is being caused
by some other factor.
Now, of course, I also recognize that every
person is unique and every person has different
goals and a different approach to their fitness
program.
So if you’ve never tracked a calorie in
your entire life and you still happen to be
seeing consistent muscle building or fat burning
progress regardless and you’re satisfied
with it, and you're doing this just by eating
a bit more or a bit less, then that’s totally
fine.
A lot of people out there will still see decent
fat loss results just by “eating healthy”
and by using portion control, not because
the foods that they're eating have special
inherent fat burning benefits, but just because
most traditional “healthy foods” are not
very calorie dense and so they allow that
person to maintain an ongoing calorie deficit
without having to track anything.
And the same goes for building muscle as well.
If you have above average genetics where your
body partitions calories favorably towards
muscle growth rather than towards fat gains,
then you probably can just “eat a bit more”
than you're used to and still see impressive
results overall.
However, if you’re currently not seeing
the results that you’re after, or even worse,
if you’re not seeing any results at all
from your program, then it’s time to buckle
down, to put in the work and to start tracking
your diet with at least a reasonable degree
of accuracy each day.
Figure out roughly what you require in terms
of total daily calories, protein, carbs and
fats to support your specific goal whether
it be to gain muscle or lose fat, and then
either start tracking your diet each day just
as you go along and you can do that using
a basic app like MyFitnessPal which I’ll
link in the description box, or you can just
take some time to lay out a basic diet plan
for yourself and then just follow that.
And if you do need more help with that area
and you want to get an exact step-by-step
diet created for you based on your goals,
your preferences and your lifestyle, then
you can also check out my new Custom Meal
Plan Service, and I’ll link that in the
description box below as well.
Now a lot of people will also be wondering
how to go about properly configuring their
daily calorie and macronutrient needs, so
I’ll also provide 2 links in the description
box below that will take you over to my website
and will show you how to lay out your daily
macros for bulking or cutting depending what
your specific goal is.
So, don’t get me wrong here, I’m obviously
not saying that you shouldn’t strive to
follow what you consider to be a healthy diet,
all I’m saying is that in the absence of
proper net energy balance based on your goals,
eating “healthy” is NOT enough if you’re
aiming to put on a significant amount of muscle
or if you're aiming to burn a significant
amount of fat.
Proper dietary tracking is really not as difficult
as a lot of people make it out to be, and
it could very easily mean the difference between
a hugely successful fitness program or one
that just fails altogether.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more no B.S, science-based nutrition tips
and meal plans, along with training and supplementation
information to maximize your muscle building
and your fat burning progress, make sure to
head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and
grab my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official website
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.