Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
EliteImpactLabs.com and in today's video lesson
I want to do a quick review of Waxy Maize
supplements.
So waxy maize is a source of carbohydrates
that is derived primarily from corn, rice
and barley and it's rich in a substance called
amylopectin which is essentially the “plant
version” of glycogen.
And because of its high amylopectin content,
waxy maize is considered to be an extremely
fast-acting carbohydrate and is sold by supplement
companies in powdered form.
So, because of its supposed rapid absorption
rate in the body, bodybuilders will often
mix waxy maize into their post workout shakes
for the purposes of quickly restoring glycogen
levels following workouts.
Glycogen is, of course, the stored form of
carbohydrates in your muscle tissue.
And some companies will actually claim that
waxy maize is absorbed up to 70 to 80 percent
faster than other popular post-workout sugars
like dextrose or maltodextrin.
So does waxy maize work?
Well the reality is that it really doesn't
matter whether or not it works because immediately
restoring glycogen levels following a workout
is not something that a typical bodybuilding
trainee even needs to concern themselves with
in the first place.
And I've already talked about this a few times
in my previous videos.
First of all, standard weight training workouts
are only going to deplete glycogen levels
by somewhere between 20 and 40 percent.
So, unless you are performing exhaustive endurance
training, your workout is not going to leave
you completely “glycogen depleted” like
some people will tell you.
And second of all, there’s really no need
to immediately restore glycogen levels after
a workout unless you were planning to train
those same muscle groups again within about
the next 24 hours or so.
The process for most typical bodybuilders
is going to be pretty simple.
You're going to go to the gym.
You're going to perform your workout.
For example, say chest and shoulders.
You're going to use up a little bit of glycogen
then you're going to go home and resume your
regular nutrition plan that includes meals
containing carbohydrates and the carbohydrates
from those meals are going to naturally restore
your glycogen levels and then you're going
to go back to the gym within the next day
or two and train again.
So it's really as simple as that.
So, whether or not waxy maize even works for
its intended purpose is irrelevant, because
its intended purpose is not going to aid your
bodybuilding program anyhow.
And the funny thing is that, even with all
of that said, waxy maize doesn’t even appear
to work for its intended purpose anyway and
I'll link 5 research studies in the description
box below which compare waxy maize to other
popular post workout sugars such as dextrose,
maltodextrin, sucrose and white bread as well.
And you'll find that in every case it was
shown to be either similar or less effective
at raising blood glucose insulin and restoring
glycogen levels following intense workouts.
So ultimately, I can't really think of a single
reason why anybody would run out and spend
their hard earned money on waxy maize.
There's no need at all for fast acting carbohydrates
during the post workout period and even if
there was it would just as effective for you
to and less expensive as well to use dextrose
or basic table sugar instead.
So if you're serious about your bodybuilding
results, you know, divert your efforts into
what really matters, which is training and
nutrition and invest in supplements with proven
research based records like high quality whey
protein, creatine, beta-alanine, multi vitamins,
fish oil, etcetera.
And if you do want to check out some very
high quality versions of those supplements,
you can check out the products that we offer
on the EliteImpactLab.com store which I'll
also link in the description box below.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free "28 Day Mass
Building Plan" using the link in the description
box below which includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide which you can
grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com and make
sure to join the Elite Impact Labs Facebook
page for daily articles, videos, tips and
muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video and I'll
talk to you again soon with more free tips.