What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
with a video here for the younger viewers
out there, or just for anybody who’s curious
about this topic.
And the question is does weight training stunt
your growth?
A lot of guys in their early and mid teens
will send me this question, because they want
to start the weight lifting program to build
some muscles and some strength but they’re
worried that it’s going to negatively effects
their height as they get older.
So, does weight lifting stunt growth?
Does body building stunt growth?
Let’s quickly go over it.
So basically the way that you grow taller
is through the lengthening of the long bones
in your body.
So, in the upper body that would your humerus
or you upper arm, and your forearm bones which
are going to be the radius and the ulna.
And then in the lower body you have the thigh
bone, which is you femur; and the bones of
the lower leg, which is the tibia and fibula.
Now, at the end of those long bones, or were
referred to as growth plate, which you’ve
probably heard of; and as you progress from
childhood into puberty those growth plates
are used to lengthen the bones by building
new cartilage at the ends, which then hardens
and is converted to actual bone.
And then when puberty is complete, the growth
plates are locked and from there you won’t
grow any taller.
So, everything to do with your vertical growth
is determined by those growth plates.
The question then is; does weight training
itself actually have any negative effect on
those plates?
And the answer according to research, which
is pretty extensive and I’ll link some of
it in the description box below, is that when
done properly and responsibly weight training
is perfectly safe for teens and it doesn’t
have adverse effects on the functioning of
the body’s growth plate.
Even the American Association of Pediatrics
says appropriate training programs have no
apparent adverse effects on linear growth,
growth plates or the cardiovascular system.
The only situation where weight training itself
could damage a growth plate and potentially
stunt your growth in some way would be through
serious sudden trauma.
Meaning that if you were to actually break
a bone or have something happen that caused
direct damage to a growth plate.
Like somehow dropping a bar on yourself, or
trying to max out with an extremely heavy
weight using terrible form and seriously injuring
yourself that way.
However, in terms of sudden serious injuries,
weight training itself is actually a very
safe activity and even safer in comparison
to a lot of other activities that teens and
younger kids would engage in.
Like sports, especially contact sports or
just everyday random things like running,
jumping, climbing things, et cetera.
So as long as you’ve done your research
and you’re following a properly structured
program, preferably with a supervision of
a more experienced lifter who knows what they’re
doing.
And as long as you’re using weights that
you can handle using proper form and you’re
not maxing out or doing obviously dangerous
things in the gym, then does weight training
stunt growth?
There’s really no reason to assume that
would be an issue of concern.
And I wouldn’t have any problem with a fourteen
year-old or a sixteen year-old following a
serious training program, as long as they’re
doing it responsibly.
The simple fact is that height is primarily
determined by hormones.
Specifically growth and IGF-1, because it’s
those hormones that communicate with the body’s
growth plates and influenced them to lengthen.
So, as long as you grow up receiving proper
nutrition then your height will simply be
determined by genetics and everyday activities
are not going to allow you to increase or
decrease your natural height in any way.
So thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this was helpful.
If you do want to check out properly structured,
step-by-step training plan for building muscle,
gaining strength and losing fat; the work-outs,
the meal plans, the supplement guides, along
with one-on-one coaching then you can download
my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here, or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You could also check out my official blog
over at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest
updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching guys, and I’ll talk
to again soon.