What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com.
Today’s question: What should you do if
you’re trying to bulk up, you want to gain
overall lean mass but it seems like you’re
mostly just gaining fat but not muscle.
I get this question all the time.
The answer is pretty straight forward.
So these are the four main mistakes you might
be making.
Mistake number one is that your targeted daily
calorie intake is just set too high.
Yes, if you’re trying to do a focus bulk
and you want to maximize you gains then you
do need to be eating in a calorie surplus
but a lot of guys who are just starting out,
especially those who are naturally very thin
and they want to gain size as quickly as possible,
they tend to take that whole ‘Eat big to
get big’ idea just a bit too far.
Like I’ve said many times before, there’s
a set limit of how much muscle your body can
build over any given day or any given week.
And just stuffing your face with more and
more food beyond that maximum threshold to
try and speed up the process, that’s only
going to make you fat.
Your goal, if you want to make lean gains
and minimize body fat increases, is going
to be to eat just enough calories to optimize
hypertrophy but nothing more than that.
If you’re gaining much more than about half
a pound of bodyweight per week or three pounds
per month at the maximum, then you’re most
likely going overboard and you’re going
to need to dial things back.
You’d still be gaining muscle in a situation
like that, of course assuming that your training
program is on point, but the increases in
body fat are going to be coming in so quickly
that it might seem like that’s the only
thing you’re gaining.
How many calories should you consume?
You’ll hear a lot of different recommendations
on this, but a pretty safe bet is around two
hundred to three hundred calories above your
maintenance level.
You can go a bit higher or a bit lower depending,
but that’s going to be a pretty safe bet
for most average lifters.
Mistake number two is that you have calculated
your calories properly and you are aiming
to it in a moderate surplus, but you’re
actually going over it without realizing it.
I’ve been doing fitness coaching for over
a decade now, I’ve worked with a lot of
different people, and one thing I’ve learned
for sure is that most people are just not
very good at accurately tracking their true
calorie intake.
And they’re very often off by a pretty big
margin.
This can happen for a few different reasons.
Number one: It could be that you’re just
winging your diet and you’re just trying
to estimate things.
Now, this can work fine for experienced lifters
who know their bodies well and who have a
good sense of the nutrition content for different
foods, but if you’re still in the beginning
stages then I’d recommend that you through
at least a period of detailed, on point dietary
tracking just to learn the road, basically.
Because if you don’t then the natural instinct
is going to be to overeat, especially if you’re
in that bulking mindset and you want to gain
as much size as possible.
The other possibility is that you are attempting
to track things but you’re just making errors
in your measurements and your overall tracking
that are adding up throughout the day.
So basically, there are little hidden items
that you’re overlooking or you’re just
measuring things wrong.
For example, if what you think is one tablespoon
of peanut butter is actually two tablespoons,
that’s a very common mistake, that’s a
hundred extra calories right there alone.
But other things like an extra glass of fruit
juice or a handful of almonds, little high
calorie snacks, cooking oils, cream and sugar
in your coffee, all of these things can add
up quite a bit for the day as a whole if you
aren’t careful.
And the other possibility is that you’re
taking the concept of cheat meals and cheat
days a bit too far.
There’s nothing wrong at all with including
cheat foods in your plan in moderation.
Eighty to ninety percent clean food is a good
guideline and then you can just fill in the
rest with whatever you want.
But when it all comes down to it, your overall
gains and bodyweight are still ultimately
going to come down to your total net energy
balance for the week as a whole.
And so everything you consume from day-to-day
counts.
So if you ate in a three hundred calories
surplus Monday to Friday but then you just
went all out on the weekend and you ate in
a twelve hundred calories surplus on Saturday
and Sunday, that would put your total surplus
on average at more like five hundred and fifty
calories a day, which is almost double what
you were aiming for.
So bottom line, when calculating your daily
calorie intake, all cheat meals and all cheat
days count.
And they’re not somehow a free-pass just
because you were good with your training and
your diet over the previous days.
So moving on to mistake number three.
For those who feel like they’re gaining
fat but not muscle, third mistake is very
simple, and that is that you’re weight training
plan is just not properly laid out and not
properly executed.
I mean you have to think of the basic logic
of muscle growth.
You go to the gym.
You place your muscles under stress in order
to stimulate growth response.
Then you leave the gym, you eat in a calorie
surplus and your body uses those calories
to build your muscles larger and stronger.
But if that growth response wasn’t strong
enough to begin with, not only will you not
gain very much new muscle because your body
will have no incentive for it, but your body
won’t even need all of the extra calories
you’re eating in order to recover it.
So those calories won’t have anywhere to
go except to your fat stores.
So if it seems like you’re gaining fat but
not muscle, you’ve got to sit down and be
honest with yourself.
Are you truly training hard in the gym and
truly pushing yourself reasonably close to
your limit during each workout?
Are you keeping track of your workouts and
applying the law of progressive overload by
steadily focusing on getting stronger overtime?
Are you being consistent with your planning,
showing up for you workouts on the assign
days?
Are you using enough total training volume
and leaving the gym knowing that you did enough
each time?
The simple fact is that a lot of guys in the
gym just don’t train hard enough.
And if you’re eating in calorie surplus
but your workout plan is weak then it shouldn’t
be any surprise that your body fat is going
up but your muscle mass is not.
And mistake number four, another very simple
one, but it’s the possibility that you just
have unrealistic expectations about how the
muscle building process works.
It’s actually very possible that there’s
nothing wrong to your plan at all and that
you’re just expecting too much too soon.
Building muscle naturally is a slow and gradual
process for the average lifter.
It doesn’t happen overnight.
And it takes time, patience and consistent
long term effort to really gain a noteworthy
amount of quality muscle.
I get a lot of messages from people asking
about this topic.
And then when I asked about their program,
it turns out that they’ve only been training
for a few weeks and they’ve only gain a
few pounds of extra bodyweight.
And some of that initial weight gain probably
isn’t even body fat at all but it’s just
additional water retention from the higher
calorie diet that they’re following.
So don’t jump the gun on this.
You aren’t going to have defined shoulders
and packs popping out after a few weeks of
training.
It’s a slow process.
And it’s a matter of consistent small increases
from week to week.
And it’ll take a few months of proper training
and proper nutrition for you to really start
seeing significant visual changes.
So thanks for watching, guys.
If you are struggling with this issue and
you want to get everything properly laid out
in step-by-step format.
Your workout plan, meal plans, supplements
and one-on-one coaching with me then you can
download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking ‘here’ or by heading over
to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link is in the description box.
Make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe if you haven’t already.
The official blog is www.SeanNal.com.
And you can follow me on facebook, twitter,
instagram, all that good stuff.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.