Hey, this is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want talk about another traditional
bodybuilding method, which is the practice
of performing cardio first thing in the morning
on an empty stomach. Now, this has been a
popular fat burning strategy among bodybuilders
for a really long time. And if you look at
it on the surface, it does seem to make sense.
You know, you'd think since there's no food
in the stomach, and since glycogen levels
are low, the body will be forced to use more
body fat for energy during the session. And
as a result, you'll lose fat faster. In reality,
just like the eat protein every three hours
rule, the post-workout shake obsession and
the eat clean 24/7 approach, fasted cardio
appears to be another piece of traditional
bodybuilding advice that when you look at
it closer, it just comes up short. Although
this is ultimately a very, very complicated
issue, let's just go over the main points
here. So, first off, the body is a far more
complex, an intricate system than most of
us could imagine. And its specific use of
fuel during exercise is constantly changing
and is affected by a ton of different internal
factors such as different hormones and enzymes.
And the attempt to burn greater amounts of
fat -- greater amounts of fat by exercising
on an empty stomach is a very over simplified
approach to a much more complex overall picture.
Secondly, worrying about what happens in small
spans of 30 to 60 minutes is an incredibly
short-sighted view of fat loss. The process
of losing fat is all about the big picture
and what you do over the course of several
days, not hours. For example, it appears that
if more carbohydrates are burned during exercise,
then you'll simply end up burning more fat
for fuel later on in the today. And in the
same way, if you burn more fat during exercise,
then more carbohydrates are burned later on.
In other words, looking at overall 24-hour
energy expenditure is definitely the most
important factor here. Thirdly, doing cardio
on an empty stomach doesn't even appear to
burn more fat in the first place. Fasted cardio
does increase the lipolysis, which is the
amount of fat that is broken down and release,
but it doesn't actually increase fat oxidation,
which is the amount of fat that you actually
burn. In other words, fasted cardio causes
the body to break down more fat than it can
actually use for energy in the first place.
And when it comes to fat loss, the limiting
factor is fat oxidation, not lipolysis. In
the end, those fatty acids that aren't used
for fuel are simply restored as body fat.
Fourth, having a pre-cardio meal actually
appears to increase the thermic effect of
exercise. So, not only does fasted cardio
have minimal to no direct effect on fat loss,
but fed cardio may actually be superior. And
this is because having a meal first appears
to increase post-exercise oxygen consumption,
which basically means that you'll burn more
total calories even after the session is over.
Fifth, performing cardio in a fasted state
reduces exercise intensity. At the end of
the day, effective cardio is all about maximizing
the total number of calories burned. And the
more total intensity that you generate, the
greater the calorie burning effect will be.
In most people performing cardio first thing
in the morning on an empty stomach will have
a significant negative impact on overall exercise
intensity, in comparison to having a meal
first. And lastly, fasted cardio causes a
greater degree of muscle loss. The research
has shown that nitrogen losses are nearly
doubled when cardio is performed on an empty
stomach. So, if you're trying to burn fat
while maintaining as much muscle as possible,
fasted cardio is probably not the smartest
choice. So, to sum this all up, not only does
fasted cardio appear to not increase fat loss
during exercise, but it may actually lower
the total amount of fat that's burned due
to a decrease in post-exercise oxygen consumption,
and a reduction in overall training intensity.
And in addition, fasted cardio causes you
to lose more muscle. So, the bottom line here
is that if you're looking to maximize fat
loss while minimizing muscle loss, it's probably
best to get a meal in at least a few hours
prior to your cardio sessions. Fasted cardio
does not produce any clear distinct fat burning
advantages, and if anything, it may be counterproductive.
So, I hope you found this information useful.
To get your complete bodybuilding program,
which also includes fat loss and cardio guidelines
as well, make sure to grab your free copy
of the no fail system over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And the link for that is in the description
bar. Also make sure to subscribe if you haven't
already. And make sure to join the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook page where we do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night. So, thanks for
watching this video lesson, and I'll talk
to you again soon.