Hey, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and this is part six of my bodybuilding and
fat loss Q&A where I'll be covering five more
commonly asked questions with straight to
the point, no BS answers that you can take
and apply to your muscle-building and fat
loss plan.
Now, once again if you want to access all
of the other Q&As that are available, then
you can use the links down in the description
box below.
So, let's get started.
Question number one, what is the ideal time
to perform cardio in order to maximize fat
loss?
So, you'll generally hear two main recommendations
on this one.
The first is to perform your cardio first
thing in the morning on an empty stomach,
because it will supposedly force your body
to burn a higher percentage of fat as opposed
to carbohydrates.
However, as I talked about in part one of
this Q&A, fasted cardio doesn't actually increase
fat loss in any measurable way.
And it might actually be counterproductive
by decreasing your overall training performance,
and by increasing muscle loss.
And the second recommendation that you'll
hear is to perform cardio immediately post-workout.
Now, the reason for this one is that since
glycogen levels have been depleted from the
weight training session, again, your body
will have no choice but to use up fat primarily
as the fuel source.
Now, this one is also misguided though, because
even an exhaustive weight training session
is only going to lower your glycogen stores
by around 30% to 40%, which leaves plenty
in the tank for post-workout cardio.
So, my advice on this one is rather than trying
to time out your cardio in some special way
to improve fat loss, just schedule it at whatever
time of day fits best into your schedule,
and whenever you feel the most motivated to
train, and when you can give your best overall
effort.
If your goal though is to build, and maintain
muscle and to gain strength at your maximum
potential, then the one piece of advice that
I would give here is to make sure that you
avoid performing cardio immediately pre-workout.
Weight training should always be treated as
the top priority in your training plan.
And you definitely don't want to be entering
your workout already physically and mentally
pre-fatigue from a full cardio session.
And this is going to be especially important
if the cardio method that you're using relies
heavily on the muscles that you'll also be
training during your workout, such as doing
a stair climber session before a leg work
out or using the rowing machine before a back
workout.
Question number two, are wide-grip dips a
good addition to a chest training routine?
Now, I did use to perform these as part of
my chest workouts many years ago.
But I don't include them any longer for the
simple reason that I just don't think the
risk-reward balance really justifies it.
Dips do allow you to train your chest with
a reasonable degree of effectiveness.
But given that they place your shoulder joints
into a riskier position, and that there are
just better exercises available for stimulating
your pecs anyway, it just doesn't really make
sense to include them in your routine in my
opinion.
Dips do involve a certain degree of horizontal
adduction which is of course the primary function
that the pecs perform.
But the movement itself is still mostly a
combination of shoulder flexion combined with
elbow extension.
And so, it's actually going to be your front
delts and your triceps that are performing
the bulk of the work.
On top of this, wide-grip dips can also be
hard on the shoulder joints.
And a very high percentage of lifters who
perform dips over the long run, eventually
do run into issues there.
Now, I'm definitely not saying that dips don't
work when it comes to building up the chest.
And I'm not saying that you're guaranteed
to get hurt by performing them.
But if your goal is to hit your pecs as effectively
as possible while also minimizing the stress
on your shoulder joints, then there are just
better options available such as dumbbell
presses and various cable fly movements.
If you really enjoy performing wide-grip dips,
and you want to continue using them as part
of your routine, then that's up to you.
But at the very least, I'd recommend that
you place them as a lower priority movement
in your chest workout that you stick to lighter
weight and higher reps and that you make sure
to perform every rep under very strict control
at all times.
Question number three, is eating late at night
counterproductive for fat loss?
Well, assuming that your overall calorie intake
and your activity level are remaining constant,
consuming a larger percentage of your total
food intake earlier or later in the day, really
isn't going to make any noticeable difference
when it comes to bottom line fat loss.
The logic that most people use here is that
since activity level and metabolic rate decrease
in the late night hours, the calories that
are consumed during that specific period are
more likely to be stored as fat.
And while that might be true, it still makes
no difference in the big picture if you have
a consistent ongoing calorie deficit in place
from day-to-day.
Like I mentioned before, fat loss is not an
on/off switch.
Fat burning and fat storage are both happening
continuously throughout the day simultaneously.
And it's the sum total of all the fat storing
processes, minus the fat burning processes.
That's going to determine your bottom line
fat loss results.
So, if person A consumes a greater amount
of their total calorie intake in the evening,
while person B consumes a greater amount earlier
on in the day, but both people are maintaining
a net 500 calorie deficit, they're actually
going to be in the same boat as far as total
fat loss is concerned.
A greater amount of person A's calories are
going to be immediately stored as fat, because
there is less of an energy demand at that
specific time.
But they'll still eventually be burned later
on the next day when the energy demand increases.
And on the other hand, a smaller amount of
person B's calories will be immediately stored
as fat, because there is a greater energy
demand at that time.
But more of them will be stored as fat later
on when the energy demand runs out.
So, if you've been intentionally starving
yourself in the evening.
And if you've been going to bed hungry even
though you'd actually prefer to eat something,
then you can stop worrying.
Just figure out what your total calorie needs
are for fat loss throughout the day as a whole.
And then if you want to allocate some of those
calories to the later hours in the evening,
then totally fine.
Question number four, which form of cardio
is most effective for burning fat: low intensity
steady state cardio or a high intensity interval
cardio?
So, in a direct head-to-head comparison, performing
your cardio at a higher level of intensity
over a shorter duration of time is actually
superior for total fat loss in comparison
to lower intensity, longer duration sessions.
And that's because high intensity cardio not
only burns calories during the actual workout
itself.
But it also causes your body to burn additional
calories for several hours even after the
session is over by increasing what's called
excess post-exercise oxygen consumption.
Low intensity cardio does burn a greater percentage
of fat during the actual workout.
But high intensity cardio still burns a greater
net amount of fat over 24-hour period.
However, that increase in fat loss does come
at a price, because high intensity cardio
is a lot more demanding on your body as a
whole.
So, if you're already performing several weight
training workouts throughout the week, there's
only so much high intensity cardio that you
can add on top of that, before the overall
weekly workload just gets too high.
And this is where low intensity cardio becomes
beneficial, because it still allows you to
burn a reasonable number of calories but without
taxing your body to a significant degree.
So, even though high intensity cardio is superior
for fat loss on a workout-for-workout basis
in comparison to low intensity cardio, your
training plan will probably still contain
a mixture of both as a way to manage overall
recovery.
And question number five, is protein powder
a necessary supplement for gaining muscle?
Well, at the end of the day, the decision
to either use or not use a protein powder,
it really just comes down to a basic issue
of convenience.
Protein powders make it possible for you to
consume an easy 20g or 30g of protein through
one pretty small scoop and also in liquid
form if you prefer.
And so, it is a useful way to streamline your
diet, and to hit your daily protein needs
more easily.
However, there's still nothing magical about
protein powder.
And you'll still be able to build muscle,
and loose fat and gain strength, just as effectively
with or without it as long as you're consuming
enough total daily protein from other high
quality sources.
Most people think of whey protein as being
some sort of high-tech muscle building supplement,
but it's really just not the case.
And whey protein is actually a natural food
source just like any other that is derived
from milk.
Protein powders will provide you with a very
high quality form of protein.
But it still won't make any real noticeable
difference within the context of a complete
diet that gives you around 1g of protein per
pound of body weight daily.
And that is based around other high quality
whole food protein sources like chicken, and
red meat and fish, et cetera.
And this is because all forms of protein are
ultimately broken down into their individual
amino acid building blocks anyway, and your
body can only use a finite amount of those
amino acids over any given 24-hour period
in order to max out its muscle building potential
over that time frame.
So, with or without a protein powder, you'll
still end up getting all of the essential
amino acids that you need to maximize muscle
growth.
As long as you're hitting your total protein
needs for the day from other high quality
food sources.
Now, all that said, having one or two shakes
a day usually does improve the convenience
and the consistency of most people's diet
plans.
And so, a high quality protein powder is still
something that most trainees will benefit
from.
However just don't make the mistake of thinking
that it's somehow mandatory.
And if you'd prefer to get all of your protein
intake from regular solid foods, then that's
totally fine.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn everything you need to
know to structure an optimal muscle building
or fat burning plan that maximizes your results
along with concrete step-by-step workouts,
meal plans and supplement plans that you can
follow, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete body transformation blueprint
system by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or by using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at Seannal.com for all of my latest articles
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.