Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
And today, I want to briefly discuss, "Front
delt training."
So, what is the best way to train this head
of the shoulder?
And which exercises are going to be the most
effective?
So, the basic standard movement for hitting
the front delts are going to be front raises.
So, it's a pretty basic movement.
And it can be performed using a barbell, dumbbells
or cables.
The reality is that in my opinion, there's
really no need to worry specifically about
front delt training at all in the majority
of cases.
And that's for two major reasons.
Number one, your front delts are already being
heavily stimulated anytime you perform any
basic compound movement for your chest or
any compound overhead pressing movement for
your shoulders.
After you've gone ahead and finished a basic
chest workout or shoulder workout, your front
delts have received more than enough stimulation
for optimal development.
And secondly, the majority of people who train
intensely with weights, already have an imbalance
between their front and their rear delt due
to an overemphasis on chest work in comparison
to back work, and due to improper form on
their rear dealt movements.
And not only does this give you asymmetrical
shoulder development, but it's also a big
injury risk as well, because as your pects
and front delts become overdeveloped in comparison
to your upper back and rear delts, your shoulder
joint gradually begins rolling forward and
out of optimal positioning, which can set
you up for a whole bunch of problems like
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement,
elbow problems et cetera.
So, my suggestion is to do your chest work.
Do your regular overhead pressing.
And don't bother with isolating the front
delt using front raises.
It's already being fully stimulated during
your chest and your shoulder workouts.
And over developing this muscle further, may
actually be counterproductive.
Of course, this doesn't apply in every single
situation.
If your shoulder development is balanced or
if in the rare case, you have underdeveloped
front delts, then, certainly you can do some
isolation work to bring that head up to speed.
But for most people, in most cases, from delt
isolation is simply unnecessary.
And if there's anywhere that you should be
focusing on, it's actually on isolating your
rear delt, in order to bring your shoulder
muscles and your shoulder joint back into
proper balance.
And I'll do a full video on that in the next
week or so.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you did enjoy the video, as always please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your YouTube discount
code in the description box below, which you
can use on all of our premium quality health,
fitness and bodybuilding supplements over
on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and free fitness supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.