What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.SeanNal.com and in this
video here we’re talking about the subject
of overtraining and I’m going to be giving
you eight signs to look out for that might
indicate that your body’s being pushed past
its ability to fully recover and also what
you can do about it.
Now, keep in mind that temporary periods of
what are called overreaching are something
that you can use strategically if you know
what you’re doing.
That can be use to temporarily overstress
your body on purpose which can give you a
larger overcompensation response on longer
term.
So in this video here what we’re talking
about is chronic unintentional training where
the combination of your workout volume and
frequency and intensity plus your day-to-day
life stress are at an excessive level and
it’s causing you to stagnate or to regress.
Or at the very least it’s not letting you
progress as quickly as you could be.
Remember that the basic logic of resistance
training is that you’re intentionally stressing
your body and then allowing it recover and
grow larger and stronger in response to the
stress.
So recovery itself is growth and if the stress
is consistently too high then you won’t
be able recover at your full potential and
won’t make size and strength gains to your
full potential either, not to mention your
risk for injury will go up as well.
And then on top of that doing more in the
gym than you really need to, is just a waste
of time and effort in general.
So if you’re going to eliminate, maybe one
weekly workout or reduce your volume by, say,
twenty percent, that’s going to free up
time and effort that you divert to other things.
Now, some people will say that overtraining
doesn’t exist at all and that it’s just
a myth, and while I would say that it does
take a fairly high workload to really get
to that point, overtraining definitely can
come into play for some lifters.
And it’s not a black and white thing either
where you’re either fully overtrain and
you can barely get up in bed in the morning
or you’re not overtrain at all.
It works more in gradient where maybe you’re
doing a bit too much and that might be slowing
down your progress slightly or maybe you are
doing way too much and it’s having a real
negative effects, or maybe you’re just somewhere
in the middle, but overtraining definitely
can happen and it will affect different people
differently depending on their genetics, their
nutrition, their sleep as well as their overall
lifestyle.
I mean, if we know that overreaching exist
where the body is being stressed beyond its
ability to fully recover then overtraining
can pretty much just be looked at as chronic
overreaching without a proper break.
So by overtraining I’m just talking about
doing more total training beyond what you
need to, to where you’re no longer progressing
optimally or to where you’re having negative
symptoms outside of the gym that could be
corrected if you brought your training workload
down a bit.
And on top of that there’s also the possibility
that you’re not technically overtraining
by performing an excessive amount of actual
lifting but you could just be under recovering
by not eating or sleeping well enough, or
by having too many daily life stresses, but
those are thing that I’ll mention later
on in the video.
So, if your progress has stalled or regressed
and you think that you might be doing too
much in the gym, here are eight signs to look
out for.
The first and the most obvious one is that
your strength levels have stagnated or decreased.
So assuming that your nutrition is on point
and you are adjusting it properly overtime,
one possibility for a weight training plateau
or a regression is that you’re just doing
too much {period}.
Keep in mind that as you become more and more
advanced, you’ll be lifting heavier and
heavier weight and so the total stress in
your body is going to be increasing not just
on your muscles but on your overall central
nervous systems as well.
Squatting three plates, for example, is going
to be a lot more stressful than squatting
two plates or squatting one plate.
Even though you are stronger the total nett
stress on your body is still going to be higher.
And so as you progress to heavier and heavier
weights you need to more carefully monitor
your total training volume and frequency to
make sure you don’t go overboard.
The second thing to look out for is if you’re
feeling burned out and just overly fatigued
midway through your workouts.
So if your training sessions were smooth sailing
before but now you’re finding it difficult
to complete all of your exercises and sets,
this is another sign that your body needs
a break.
An off day here and there is no big deal but
if you find yourself constantly yawning throughout
your workout and feeling slow and sluggish
and just generally lethargic then it might
be time to hit the brakes a bit.
Third is that you just feel generally tired
and sluggish throughout the day.
So the increase in fatigue doesn’t need
to be limited to the gym only and if you’re
having a hard time getting out of bed and
your energy level and focus have clearly gone
down in comparison to what they were before,
this is another possible sign of overtraining
that you’ll want to look out for.
Or if not fatigue then feeling irritable and
moody or even depressed that’s another possibility.
Next up is decreased training motivation.
So it’s totally normal to have a certain
days where you just don’t feel like hitting
the gym, that happens to everyone, but if
your motivation was perfectly fine before
and now even just the thought of training
seems totally unappealing and you really don’t
feel like doing anything physically strenuous
at all, that could also be your body’s way
of telling you that you’re just doing too
much.
Number five is a drop in sleep quality.
So usually in the evening your body’s parasympathetic
nervous system activities goes down and sleep
hormones rise and that helps you fall asleep
but if you get into an overtraining state
then your nervous systems stays active for
longer and you’ll have issues falling asleep.
And also you won’t sleep as deeply and you
might find yourself waking up more frequently
during the night.
And then this can, kind of, feedback on itself
because sleep is an important time for recovery
so you’re not going to recover as well and
then your sleep quality could further decrease
if you don’t make the proper adjustments.
Number six is that you might find yourself
getting sick more often.
When you overstressed your body through training
or just in general your immune system function
is getting impaired.
And so if you find yourself feeling under
the weather more often than normal that can
be another sign that you need to cut back
slightly.
Number seven is to look at how your joints
feel.
Little aches and pains here and there happen
to most lifters from time to time and it might
not be a big issue for concern.
But if your joints are clearly in more pain
than usual and it’s persisting and it’s
not going away unless you take a deload or
a week or two off then that something else
that you’re going to want to look out for.
Remember that weight training doesn’t just
stress your muscles and your joints and connective
tissues are stressed as well.
So you want to be really careful there because
joint health is a limiting factor in your
plan.
And it doesn’t matter how strong your muscles
are because if your foundation isn’t strong
enough to support the weights that you’re
lifting then your entire program is going
to be held back.
And then number eight is a decrease in sex
drive and that’s because overtraining and
just stress in general causes a decrease in
testosterone levels and so if your libido
has noticeably gone down in combination with
some of the other factors that I’ve mentioned
that’s going to be another sign that your
body is being pushed a bit too hard.
Now, if you do suspect that maybe your body
might be overtrain and some of these signs
are clearly showing up for you then there
are a few things that you can do.
First off is to moderate your training intensity.
So you shouldn’t training to failure on
every single set for example, especially not
on big compound lifts like squats and deadlifts.
It’s something that you can use from time
to time but overall on most sets I would say
to leave one rep in the tank maybe two and
also either hugely limit or completely avoid
other high intensity technique as well.
So things like forced reps, drop sets, super
sets, heavy negatives, things like that.
Because those can be really stressful and
they just aren’t necessary in the first
place anyway for most people.
If you’re regularly lifting heavy and train
to failure and using high intensity techniques
then cutting out those things alone will usually
make a big difference.
Second is to incorporate deloads into your
training plan.
So I would say a one week deload for every
six to twelve weeks of consistent training
that would work well.
And you can either continue training but reduce
the weight by fifty percent on all of your
lifts or just do what I do and take an entire
week off altogether to fully rest.
Third is to make sure that your nutrition
and sleep are on point.
So like I’d mention before, it’s possible
that you’re not technically overtraining
and the problem could just be that you’re
under eating or under sleeping.
Again, weight training is a way of intentionally
putting your body under stress and it needs
the proper nutrients and adequate rest in
order to recover from that stress.
So you want to make sure you’re getting
enough protein, around 0.8 to 1 gram per pound
of body weight daily as well as enough total
calorie.
So I wouldn’t recommend eating any less
than five hundreds calorie below maintenance
on a consistent basis.
If you’re eating around maintenance or in
a surplus then it isn’t going to be as big
of a concern but for those who are in a cutting
phase they’re going to be much more susceptible
to overtraining if they go too low on calories.
And then in terms of sleep, I don’t have
a set recommendation there because it does
depend on the person but I would just say
to make sure that you’re getting enough
quality sleep each night to where you feel
fully rested and mentally alert throughout
the day.
Eight hours is a good guideline for the average
person but it does vary.
And I’ll link a post in the description
box below that I did previously that outlines
seven sleep tips that you can follow that
are going to help you fall asleep faster and
also sleep more deeply.
Now, if you are moderating your training intensity,
you’re incorporating deloads or rest weeks
and your nutrition and sleep are on point
but you’re still feeling overtrained and
you’re not making progress then the next
step is to reduce your actual training volume
and/or your training frequency.
So it’s very hard to give concrete guidelines
here because training programs can vary so
much depending on the person and their experience
level as well as their goals, so I would say
just to start off by shaving off a few sets
from your workouts, maybe a twenty percent
reduction or so, and use that as a starting
point and see if it helps out.
Or another option as well is to reduce your
actual training frequency.
So if you’re in the gym six days a week
right now try cutting it back to five, or
if you’re currently doing five then cut
it back to four.
And lastly, also factor in your lifestyle
as well and any other activities that you’re
doing outside of the gym.
So it might not be that the actual weight
training plan you’re following is particularly
excessive but it could just be that the weight
training in combination with a generally stressful
lifestyle that could be what’s causing the
effects.
So reducing general life stress is a whole
other topic but that’s another area to look
at if you are having these symptoms.
Because if you’re able to reduce your stress
levels and free out more physical and mental
energy as a result of that, then you might
just be able to just keep on training in the
same way without any problems.
And then in terms of actual physical activities,
again also factor those in.
For example, if you are weight training four
times a week but you’re also doing kickboxing
twice a week and you’re hiking on the weekends,
and maybe doing other cardio on top of that,
all of those things add up and they can push
you to the point of over training as well.
So you have to find a proper balance between
weight training and any other strenuous activities
that you’re doing.
For most average trainees, three to four weight
training workouts per week will be a good
guideline along with two to three additional
cardio sessions.
And any physically strenuous activity would
count as a cardio session even if it isn’t
being done in a traditional gym setting, so
just keep that in mind.
So those are some common overtraining signs
to look out for along with some possible solutions.
This is a pretty complex topic because so
many different things come into play but hopefully
this give you some ideas to work with and
I hope it was helpful.
So, thanks for watching, guys.
If you do want to grab a complete fully structured
program that creates a proper balance between
weight training, cardio and nutrition to give
you consistent ongoing progress without the
risk of overtraining including all of my recommended
workouts, meal plans and supplement guides
then you can download my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by heading over
to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com the link
is in the description box.
Make sure to like, comment and subscribe if
you found the video useful.
My official blog is over at www.SeanNal.com
and you can follow me on social media here
as well if you aren’t already, the links
for that are also in the description box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.