What’s going on guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com - www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
It is Monday afternoon here in Australia,
start of another week.
In today’s video the subject is How To Clean
Bulk Without Gaining Fat.
So how do you stay as lean as possible while
gaining that muscle size and strength that
you’re after.
Now there are two pretty straight forward
steps involved here.
The first step is nutrition related and the
second one is training related.
In terms of nutrition implementing an effective
clean bulk ultimately just comes down to controlling
the size of your calorie surplus.
That’s really the central thing.
So rather than just aimlessly eating a bunch
of food without really tracking anything,
which is of course refer to as dirty bulking.
With clean bulking you just want to create
a small, more tightly controlled calorie surplus
so that you’re providing your body with
just enough that it needs to either maximize
or come close to maximizing muscle growth
without taking any unnecessary excess.
Keep in mind that eating more calories does
not guarantee more muscle growth.
Your body can only build a limited amount
of muscle over any particular period.
So any excess calorie that you take in above
and beyond what your body can use to max-out
protein synthesis in a given day or given
week that’s just going to be stored as fat.
Wait for it.
Okay, so where was I?
Now that’s why I generally prefer that most
people stick to a clean, or at least cleaner
bulking approach.
Because gaining a bunch of fat is really not
fun, even though right now you might think
that you just want to get bigger.
And you don’t really care if you get fat.
Trust me, if you do gaining a bunch of fat
you’re not going to enjoy it and I speak
from personal dreamer bulk experience.
Secondly, dieting for fat loss is very tedious
and the more fat that you gain during your
bulk the longer you’re going to have to
diet for later on.
Now people will tell you that in order to
do clean bulk you need to stick to clean foods
and you need to increase your cardio.
But that’s not quite accurate.
You can still clean bulk while using a flexible
dieting approach and without even having to
increase your cardio.
Because, again, it’s really just about controlling
your overall net calorie surplus.
If you’re not really tracking anything in
terms of diet then yes, eating clean foods
can help a bit because they’re just lowering
calories by default most of the time.
Doing cardio can help because it will burn
additional calories and reduce your surplus
by default.
But if you are tracking your diet then you
don’t necessarily have to do those things.
Now you’ll hear different numbers thrown
around but I would say for an effective clean
bulk you’re going to go somewhere between
200 to 300 calories above your calorie maintenance
level.
You can go a little bit higher and you could
go a little bit lower depending, but somewhere
in that ranges can be about right.
And from a nutritional perspective that’s
basically “it” when it comes to clean
bulking.
Just create a small calorie surplus, track
it and focus on making gradual gains to somewhere
around that half a pound per week range.
And if you’re more advance then it’s going
to be even slower than that.
Now most people think of effective clean bulking
only in terms of nutrition but what you do
in the gym is actually just as important.
I know that this is very basic advice, but
are you actually training hard enough?
Do you really train with a high enough level
of intensity?
And is there sufficient volume and frequency
in your plan?
Because if not that’s actually going to
increase the percentage of your calorie surplus
that gets diverted to your fat stores rather
than into your muscles.
I mean, think about the basic logic of muscle
growth.
You go into the gym and you train to give
it muscle, you stimulate a growth response
in that muscle and then you consume a calorie
surplus.
And your goal is to have as many of those
excess calories diverted to muscle growth
as possible.
But if that growth response is weak or if
it's at least not as strong as it could be
because you’re just not pushing yourself
hard enough, then your body may not even need
all of those extra calories that you’re
eating in order to fully recover.
And as a result of that a reasonable percentage
of your calorie surplus, even if it is a smaller
surplus to begin with, it still going to end
up as body fat.
It’s a topic that actually doesn’t get
talked about that often, but muscle growth
is an adaptive response to stress.
And if the stress isn’t high enough, you’re
not going to make optimal gains.
You need enough total intensity within at
least one to two reps of muscular failure
on most sets.
You need enough training volume, that’s
going to vary a lot depending on different
factors, but somewhere between eight to twelve
sets for larger muscle groups.
Maybe around five to seven sets for smaller
muscles and you also need enough frequency.
So usually that means hitting each muscle
directly no less than once per week and usually
closer to twice a week for most people.
You want all of those factors in place so
that your body actually uses your calorie
surplus primarily to fuel muscle growth.
A lot of people just don’t train that hard.
If that’s the case then it doesn’t matter
if your clean bulking from a nutrition perspective
because you’re going to gain fat, since
the muscle growth response that you’re creating
just isn’t strong enough.
So the bottomline on clean bulking; it’s
very simple and it just comes down to maintaining
a small calorie surplus.
It’s not necessarily about clean foods or
about cardio and it’s definitely not about
supplements.
Just keeping that small calories surplus in
place, and combining it with a training program
that is properly structured in terms of training
intensity, volume and frequency.
And in doing that you’re going to maximize
the percentage of your gains that come in
the form of muscle rather than fat.
You’re still going to gain fat no matter
what.
Keep in mind that’s always part of the bulking
process.
But doing this is going to help you absolutely
minimize it.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to lay all of this
out from A to Z, the workouts, the meal plans,
and the few basic supplements then you can
check out my body transformation blue print.
It will show you everything you need to know.
You can click here.
Or you can head over to www.bodytransformationtruth.com.
The link is the description.
Make sure that you’re following me on social
media.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
And if you like the video, feel free to share
it, like it, comment on it and subscribe if
you haven’t already.
Talk to you guys again soon.