Hey, this is Sean Nalewanyj of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want to discuss fish oil and
its direct effects on muscle growth and recovery.
Fish oil's effects on overall health are very
lengthy, from improving the cardiovascular
system, to the immune system, to blood pressure,
cholesterol, brain function, et cetera.
But what have lot of people don't know is
that fish oil actually has specific benefits
for those trying to build muscle and burn
fat.
And here are the three main ways.
The first is that fish oil appears to increase
muscle anabolism.
This was shown in a study at the Washington
University, School of Medicine.
The link for that is in the description, and
it showed that when a group of 25 to 45-year-olds,
were given 4grams of fish oil daily, the researchers
found a notable increased in muscle protein
synthesis.
Protein synthesis is the process where cells
combine individual amino acids to build complete
proteins.
And since proteins are the fundamental building
blocks of muscle tissue, this is obviously
very important.
They also found an increase in the mTOR pathway,
which is a key signaling pathway that controls
muscle cell growth.
The second is that fish oil appears to decrease
muscle catabolism.
So, not only just fish oil will help you build
new muscle tissue faster, but it also helps
you preserve your existing gains.
You know, your muscles are constantly undergoing
a process of both anabolism, which is muscle
growth, and catabolism, which is muscle breakdown.
And your net muscle gains are determined by
taking the total amount of anabolism, and
subtracting the total amount of catabolism.
So, if you minimize muscle catabolism, you
maximize your overall muscle gains.
Fish oil appears to suppress muscle catabolism
in two main ways.
The first is by lowering cortisol levels.
Cortisol is a powerful catabolic hormone that
breaks down muscle tissue for you as energy.
And second is by decreasing the activity of
what's called, "The ubiquitin-proteasome system."
You don't need to remember that.
But this system is the main cause of muscle
breakdown, and is suppressed when EPA intake
increases.
And EPA is one of the two Omega-3 fatty acids
that's found in fish oil.
And the third is that fish oil decreases inflammation.
Reducing inflammation after training sessions,
helps you enhanced muscle recovery and overall
growth.
Not only there's a reduction in the inflation
and improve muscle recovery, but it also has
beneficial effects on your joints and your
connective tissues.
And since weight training places a lot of
stress on those structures, fish oil appears
to be an important supplement in preventing
injuries and managing existing training-induced
aches and pains.
So all in all, I'd say that those are three
pretty solid reasons to make use of fish oil
for bodybuilding specific purposes.
In terms of specific dosages, you know, the
main thing to keep in mind is that it's not
the overall amount of raw fish oil that's
important, it's the specific amount of EPA
and DHA that matters.
Again, these are the two key Omega-3 fatty
acids that are found in fish oil that produced
all of the benefits we just talked about.
While there's no absolute guideline in place,
a good figure to shoot for is 3grams daily
of combined EPA and DHA, which will usually
equate to around 4grams to 7grams of total
fish oil, depending on which specific part
that you're using.
Now, there are a lot of very low grade fish
oils out there, so you do need to make sure
that you choose your fish oil carefully.
If you want to remove the guess work, then
you can check out EFA UltraPure.
And the link is in the description box for
that.
EFA UltraPure contains 420ml of EPA, and 280ml
of DHA per 1000ml of fish oil, which is far
more potent than most other popular fish oil
brands.
It's also produced using molecular distillation,
which removes toxins, PCB's and heavy metals
to below detectable limits for human consumption.
And the soft shells are also enteric-coated,
which is an added bonus as it eliminates those
fish burps that you get with many other brands.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
Make sure to subscribe if you haven't already,
and make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where I do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night, talk to you
again soon with more free tips.