Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
And in this video lesson, I want to share
with you a really great homemade weight gainer
shake recipe that you can include in your
diet.
Now, weight gain shakes are a really good
way to help you meet your total calorie needs
for the day.
If you're calorie needs are on the higher-end,
and they also work well if you're just looking
for a convenient way to get some good protein,
carbs and fats into your diet without having
to prepare, you know, an entire whole food
meal and go through the process of cooking
and eating and all that.
So, this is just a really convenient way to
get some high quality muscle building nutrition
into your diet.
Now, a lot of people tend to go with the commercial
weight gain powders that you can buy, where
everything is kind of just combined into a
single powder.
The problem with that is that most commercial
weight gain powders are really nothing more
than a very basic mix of whey protein with
maltodextrin.
Now, maltodextrin is really nothing more than
just a basic simple sugar.
Now, there's nothing wrong with that if it's
consumed in moderation, and if it fits into
your total macronutrient intake for the day.
But the problem is that if you're getting,
you know, 70, 80, 90, 100grams of carbs from
pure maltodextrin, you are going to be getting
the carbs, but you're going to be missing
out on a lot of the extra stuff that you want
with it.
You're not going to be getting any fiber,
you're not going to be getting very many -- vitamins
or minerals.
And the commercial weight gain powders also
tend to be lower in healthy fat content as
well.
So, what I recommend people do is to just
supplement with regular whey protein on its
own.
And then combined it with your own carbs and
fats, and that where you're going to get the
fiber, you're going to get the micronutrients,
the high quality protein, and you're going
to get the healthy fats as well, and it's
going to taste better on top of that.
So, there are an endless number of different
weight gain shakes that you could use.
This is just one that I really like myself.
I've used this for many years.
And any time I'm on a mass gaining phase,
I probably consume one or two of these per
day.
So, it's going to be a very basic combination.
You're going to start with whey protein.
I'm of course using IsoM3 whey protein from
EliteImpactLabs.com.
And I'll link that in the description box
below if you want more information on that.
This is a chocolate flavor.
For this recipe, you can really use any flavor
that you want, chocolate, strawberry, vanilla
or whatever.
I'm using chocolate today though.
The carbohydrates are going to come from oatmeal
and a banana.
And the healthy fats are going to come from
natural peanut butter.
And I'm going to add a little bit of cinnamon
for flavor as well.
So, the base of the shake is going to be 10ounces
of skim milk with a few ice cubes.
If you don't drink milk, you can also use
Almond milk or rice milk as well.
Those are fine substitutes.
And then you're just going to mix everything
up and blend it together obviously.
So, it's a pretty easy way to go.
It only takes a couple minutes.
So, we'll start here with the banana.
This is a pretty huge banana.
So, I may not use the entire thing or just
save the other part.
Then, you're going to throw the oatmeal in.
One quick tip for oatmeal, you can use quick
oats if you want, and that will blend up fine.
But if you're going to use regular -- regular
oats, I recommend that you pretty blend them
in a regular blender first.
That will turn it into kind of the powder
that's going to mix up a lot better.
If you just throw a regular oats in, you'll
find that they tend to sink to the bottom
and they get kind of chunky and it really
doesn't taste very good.
So, pre-blend them first.
And turn it into kind of a powder where we
make sure that it mixes up easier.
Oops, still in here.
And we're going to go with a table spoon of
natural peanut butter.
You can also use Almond butter, that's fine
as well or any other natural nut butter that
you prefer.
I would recommend staying away from the commercial
stuff though, and go with the natural kind.
And you're just going to use one table spoon.
Now, if you are on a higher calorie diet,
obviously getting those extra calories in
isn't as big of a deal.
But you do want to make sure that you're measuring
your peanut butter up accurately, because
one table spoon of peanut butter is 100 calories.
And if you're using a big huge glob like most
people do, you're going to be adding lot of
extra calories without even realizing it.
Now, again, if you're on a higher calorie
diet, it may not be as big of a deal.
But if you're on sort of a cleaner bulk or,
you know, you really want to nail your calories
down, make sure you measure this accurately,
because if you use significantly more than
an actual table spoon like most people, you're
going to be sneaking in a lot of extra calories
without realizing it.
So, one tablespoon of natural peanut butter,
then we're just going to put in like a pinch
of cinnamon.
You can use as much as you want, but I just
kind of estimate.
And then of course, we're going to finish
it off with two scoops of the protein powder.
And that's pretty much it.
I just going to blend it up.
I prefer to use a hand blender.
You can use a regular blender obviously.
So, that's that, again, as you can see it
only take a couple minutes to make.
And it's a very easy way to get some high
quality protein, carbs and fats into your
diet.
This shake is going to give you about 800
calories, about 80grams of protein, 80grams
of carbs and 20grams of fat.
And it tastes really good as well.
And I've been using this particular shake
for probably three or four years.
And I drink one or two of them every single
day.
So, give that a try.
Again, this recipe isn't set in stone.
There's a lot of ways you can modify it.
If you want to increase the calorie content
even further, you know, you can have more
protein powder, you can add in different kinds
of fruit, strawberries, or blueberries work
well.
If you want to increase the fat content, you
can throw out some flaxseed oil or some olive
oil.
You can even throw out some ice cream or some
yogurt.
You can kind of be creative and see -- see
what you like.
But this is a good starting point, give that
a try if you have higher calorie needs or
if you want a convenient way to get your muscle
building nutrition in for the day.
This is a really great way to go.
So, I hope you found this recipe here useful
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to leave a comment, hit the like
button and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
all of our future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide.
And you can grab that from EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free bodybuilding tips.