Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to discuss low intensity cardio
and whether or not it is a useful form of
cardio to include in your program.
So over the past several years, the popularity
of H.I.I.T cardio which is short for “High
Intensity Interval Training” has completely
taken off, and unlike traditional low intensity,
long duration cardio, H.I.I.T sessions basically
take the opposite approach by utilizing a
harder pace for a shorter duration, alternating
between interval periods of high and low intensity
and these sessions usually last somewhere
between 8 to 20 minutes in total.
Now in a head-to-head comparison, the research
has demonstrated that high intensity low duration
cardio does burn more total fat and spare
more lean muscle tissue than a lower intensity,
longer duration sessions do, and this is mostly
due to an increase in excess-post exercise
oxygen consumption, where the body is forced
to burn additional calories for several hours
after the session is over due to the oxygen
deficit that is created by the higher intensity
level.
So yes, on a direct session-for-session basis,
H.I.I.T cardio will deliver a more powerful
fat burning stimulus to your body than a typical
slow-pace 45 minute session will.
But does that mean that low intensity cardio
is a waste of time and does it mean that you
should completely eliminate those moderate
pace sessions and replace them all with high
intensity interval cardio workouts instead?
Well, no, and this is where all of those over-hyped
marketing campaigns and fat loss programs
centered around H.I.I.T cardio as the be-all-end-all
of proper fat burning cardio do get things
wrong.
And the reason for this is simple.
Although H.I.I.T cardio does burn more total
fat, it’s also more taxing on your body
as a whole.
You can only perform a limited amount of high
intensity cardio before you ultimately end
up overtraining yourself.
The intensity level that is required for a
session to truly qualify as a H.I.I.T workout
will place your central nervous system under
a lot more stress than, say, a brisk 45 minute
walk on the treadmill will, and this is one
of the major drawbacks to these types of sessions.
If you’re already performing a typical 3
to 5 day per week weight training schedule,
then there really is only so much H.I.I.T
cardio that you can add on top of this before
you start to feel excessively fatigued and
burned out.
Not to mention that the overall impact on
your joints will likely be greater as well,
though this does depend on the specific type
of cardio exercise that you’re using.
Now this is obviously going to vary from person
to person, but any more than 2, maybe 3 at
the most H.I.I.T cardio sessions per week
on top of regular training is going to be
too much.
And this is where low intensity cardio comes
into play, and why it's definitely not “useless”
or a waste of time like many people would
have you believe.
Any activity where you’re moving your body
for a reasonable pace for a reasonable length
of time is going to burn calories and is going
to help you lose fat, and low intensity cardio
is a simple way for you to burn through additional
calories while placing your body under a minimal
amount of total additional stress.
For example, let’s say you were in a cutting
phase and you were doing 4 days of weight
training and 2 days of H.I.I.T.
cardio and you don’t want to cut your dietary
calorie intake any lower but you need to create
a larger deficit in order to stimulate further
fat loss.
Well, 1 to 2 low intensity cardio sessions
per week would fit perfectly into a situation
like this.
Or let’s say you were performing heavy squats
and deadlifts a couple times a week and you
found your legs to be getting quite sore and
fatigued on your off days.
Low intensity cardio would be a useful tool
here to help you burn through additional calories
without impeding your leg recovery.
And these are just a couple of very basic
examples.
Remember, when it comes to proper fat burning
and muscle building training, issues like
this are very rarely black and white, so to
say that one single method is absolutely superior
and that it should be used at the exclusion
of all other methods is usually not accurate.
High intensity/low duration cardio and low
intensity/high duration cardio are simply
two different fat burning tools that are available
to you and they both have their own unique
application depending on the specific situation
that you're in.
Low intensity cardio may not burn quite as
many calories as high intensity cardio does,
but it is still effective nonetheless and
it does have its own unique advantages that
high intensity cardio doesn't offer.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
And make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.