Hey, what’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com.
And in this video, I want to address a question
that came up on my recent “Ask me anything”
video.
I did read through all the questions by the
way, and I received a lot of them.
So, thanks guys for that.
And I’ll just be slowly going through and
answering them.
Some in batches and some in dedicated videos
like this.
But today’s question is a pretty simple
one.
But it is one that I do get asked a lot.
And the question is does strength equal size?
And like most bodybuilding questions the answer
isn’t perfectly black and white.
But basically the answer is yes.
Significant gains in strength will lead to
significant gains in muscle size, but only
if you’re eating in a calorie surplus.
If you’re eating in a surplus and you’re
consistently adding weight to the bar overtime
on all of your major lifts, then yes, those
increases in strength absolutely will correlate
to increases in muscle size.
And not only that, but this is actually, by
far, the single most important factor of anything
in your entire training program.
And it’s the one thing that should be given
the highest amount of focus when you’re
in the gym.
Total training volume is obviously important.
And training frequency is obviously important.
But progressive overload, that still the ultimate
bottom line when it comes to building muscle.
So many people try to over-complicate things,
and they end up losing sight of that one basic
principle.
But it’s the principle that basically lies
at the foundation of the entire muscle building
process.
If you’re not consistently getting stronger,
you’re not going to be getting much bigger.
You can pretty much be guaranteed of that.
And that’s why I always say that it’s
so crucial to keep a training log book, and
track your workouts.
And then focus on beating the numbers each
week, because just doing that alone and then
combining it with a reasonably controlled
calorie surplus, that basically guarantees
muscle growth for you.
Now, on the other hand, if you’re not eating
in a calorie surplus, then it actually is
still possible to gain strength without gaining
a significant amount of size.
And that’s because your body can gain strength
both through increases in actual muscle mass,
but also through neural pathways, which basically
just means that your body can become more
efficient at using the existing muscle mass
that it already has.
So, if you’re eating at your calorie maintenance
level or you’re eating in a calorie deficit,
you can still get stronger in the gym without
adding a significant amount of new muscle.
Now, like I said before, it isn’t black
and white.
And that’s because if you’re still a beginner,
then it is possible to build a small amount
of muscle even if you are eating at maintenance
or in a deficit.
But just keep in mind that it won’t be to
a significant degree, and it’s only going
to be temporary anyway.
But if we’re talking here about a person
whose primary goal is to gain muscle, then
you must combine those strength gains with
a calorie surplus.
And that just comes down to basic energy balance,
because your body needs those extra calories
in order to physically build new muscle.
You can’t build a house without bricks.
And you’re not going to build muscle without
additional calories.
So, bottom line here just to sum this all
up increases in strength combined with a calorie
surplus that equals muscle growth.
And on the other hand, increases in strength
without a calorie surplus that potentially
equals a small amount of muscle, but probably
only in the beginning stages of your training.
Guys if you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to properly combine
an effective training routine, with a well-structured
nutrition plan to build muscle as efficiently
as possible, then you can grab my Body Transformation
Blueprint over at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video, feel free to share
it, hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe.
And my official website is over at Seannal.com,
if you want to check it out.
Thanks for watching guys.
I appreciate the support.
And I’ll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.