What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.SeanNal.com and in this
video today, a pretty important topic, I think.
Something that I’ve been wanting to address
for a little while here in a dedicated video
and that’s the question of whether or not
counting macros is really necessary in order
to build a great physique.
This is something that I get asked about pretty
often.
Before I jump into the video, make sure to
hit the subscribe button below to stay up
to date on future videos.
And you can also click the little bell button
right beside it as well, and that way you'll
be notified anytime I do upload new content
so you don’t missed out on anything.
So, is tracking macros necessary or a better
way to phrase it would be to ask just how
closely should you track your diet each day
to get the results that you're after.
Should you count exact macros, should you
track overall calories only, or should you
just eat intuitively and estimate things as
you go.
Now, you guys already know that I rarely give
black and white answer to these sorts of questions,
because with most things bodybuilding and
fitness related, there're very rarely a one
single answer that’s going to apply across
the board to everyone.
And with the question of tracking macros it
really comes down to the individual.
It depends on their specific goals, it depends
on their lifestyle as well as their personal
preferences.
So what I'm going to do here is break this
down as clearly as I can by giving you three
individual levels of nutritional tracking
to choose from, as well as who they would
apply to.
Level one being the least detailed amount
and level three being the most detailed.
And you can just take the information I gave
here and then apply it to your own situation
and decide what's going to be appropriate
for you at your current stage.
So level one would be an intuitive eating
approach, and that’s basically means you're
just going to eyeball your meals and you're
going to based your food choices and your
portion sizes on your body’s hunger signals,
rough estimations of the nutritional content,
as well as your personal fitness goals.
And there’re two main situations where intuitive
eating is going to be a good option.
The first one is, really simply, if you’ve
been using intuitive eating approach up until
now and you're consistently getting positive
results that you're satisfied with.
I don’t recommend that most complete beginners
to try to eat on the fly without any set structure
in place, because more often than not they're
going to end up eating too many or too few
calories, but for some people it can work
out just fine.
So if your body weight, your body fat percentage,
your gym performance, if all of those things
have been moving in the right direction even
though you’re not specifically tracking
calories or counting macros, then you can
just continue with what you're doing and only
switched to a more detailed system later on
if your results stagnate.
Maybe your goal is to lose fat and you’ve
just been focusing on healthier food choices
and basic portion control, or maybe your goal
is to gain muscle and you’ve just bumped
up your overall food intake a little bit to
get the extra calories you need.
If that’s working right now then just stick
with it because there's no reason to do more
than you have to.
And then the second situation where intuitive
eating would work well is if you're a more
advanced trainee and you’ve learned how
to do it effectively through experience.
So, you’ve tracked macros in the past, you
have a good idea of which foods and which
portion sizes contain what, you know how your
body responds at various calorie totals, and
you know how to adjust your intake based on
your hunger level.
I mean, if you’ve just built up enough overall
experience to be able to meet your nutritional
needs based on feel and on your own estimations
then intuitive eating is going to be a great
option for you.
Next up is level two, and this is where you're
going to track overall calories but then just
roughly estimate your macros.
So intuitive eating is the ultimate direction
that most people are going to want to strive
for in the long run because it’s not realistic
or necessary for you to be tracking calories
and macros for the rest of your life, but
it usually does require a good amount of time
and effort for most people to learn how to
do that properly.
So for that reason a more structured method
of eating is probably going to be best through
the beginner and the intermediate stages until
you gain more overall experience.
And in my view, this level of tracking, which
is staying pretty on point with your overall
calories but then just approximating your
macros, that’s going to be best suited to
the majority of people watching this, I think.
It’s detailed enough to get you optimal
or near optimal results, but it’s also simple
enough that you're not going to need to revolve
your entire day around food and count everything
in a precise detail.
Keep in mind that total calorie intake is
by far the most important factor in your overall
nutrition plan.
That’s what's going to dictate whether you
gain weight or lose weight, and as long as
your protein, carb and fat intake is reasonably
balance in the big picture, tracking total
calorie is usually enough to get the results
that you're after.
Calorie is absolutely do matter, though, regardless
of what anyone tries to tell you.
So you do need to be pretty on point with
them.
If you want to lose fat then you need to be
maintaining a calorie deficit by burning more
calories than you take in.
And if you're bulking and you want to maximize
muscle size and strength gains then you want
to be eating in a small calorie surplus by
consuming more calories than you burn.
You can still gain muscle while eating at
maintenance or in a deficit depending on experience
level and genetics and things like that, that’s
something that I’ll cover in the future
video, but it’s not going to be to the same
degree that you'll get in a surplus.
So what I'd advice here is to track your overall
calories decently closely.
I mean, if on Sundays you go a bit over or
a bit under that’s fine.
Keep in mind that it’s mostly about your
average intake over the course of a few days
or the week.
And then from there just make sure you're
hitting your minimums for protein and fat,
which is usually pretty easy to do.
I don’t recommend that people eat low carb
unless they have a specific reason for it,
but protein and fat are technically the two
essential macros that you need to make sure
getting enough of.
You need enough protein to build and repair
muscle, obviously, and to maintain muscle
on a cut.
And you need enough fat to maintain optimal
testosterone levels along with a bunch of
other important physical and mental health
benefits.
So make sure you're getting in at least 0.8
grams of protein per pound of bodyweight daily
up to about a gram, and make sure that you're
getting at least twenty-five percent of your
total calories from fat.
If all you're tracking is total calories without
even thinking about macros at all then depending
on your dietary preferences and your calorie
intake, it is possible that you might go too
low on protein and fat.
So I’d suggest that at least being conscious
of those two to make sure that you're getting
enough.
But all in all, as long as you're getting
the right amount of calories along with sufficient
protein and fat, interchanging your macros
a bit isn’t going to be a big deal as long
as you're not going excessively high or low
on any of them.
Just try to keep them reasonably balanced
by basing each of your main meals around a
basic protein and carbohydrate pairing, add
in a couple sources of healthy fat throughout
the day and get in a couple serving of both
fruits and vegetables as well.
If you follow that basic outline then specific
macros will usually tend to just take care
of themselves.
And then lastly, there's level three, which
is the typical full on macro tracking where
you know pretty much exactly how many grams
of proteins, carbs and fats you're eating
each day and you're consistently hitting those
numbers.
And I would say that this applies in three
main situations.
The first one is if you take your training
very seriously and you want to be a hundred
percent certain that you're squeezing out
every possible ounce of results from your
nutrition.
This is especially applies if you're trying
to get into a specific shape by a specific
deadline.
So a physique competition, a photo shoot or
something along those lines.
In that case, counting macros would make sense
to make sure you're eating plan is fully dialed
in without any guesswork involve.
So as long as you're aware that tracking everything
to the exact gram is probably only going to
give you a small boost in the overall picture
and that boost is worth it to you, then go
ahead and track macros as normal.
The second situation would just be if you
like the organizational aspect of it.
And if you find that having a set structure
like that keeps you more motivated and more
on track because it lets you know for sure
that you're hitting all of your nutritional
needs without any guesswork.
Some people find tracking macros to be too
detailed and ultimately unsustainable because
of that whereas other people are perfectly
fine with it, and they actually prefer it
because it gives them the structure that they
need.
And then the third situation where tracking
macros would be beneficial is simply for people
who have never done it before.
Just to do it for a temporary period in order
to learn it as an overall long term skill.
Like I said, in the long run most people are
going to be better off moving toward a more
intuitive style of eating but people who have
tracked macros before are going to be in a
better long term position to do that because
they’ll have a better understanding of their
body’s caloric needs and which foods roughly
contain what.
And that’s going to make naturally eating
on the fly a lot easier to do effectively.
So if you're still in those beginning stages
and you're just learning the fundamentals
and you're really serious about maximizing
your results and doing this for the long haul
then a temporary period of macro tracking
is something that you can use just to gain
as an overall long term nutritional skill.
And then the final point I'd make here is
for those who probably shouldn’t be tracking
macros regardless of the situation, and that's
for people who are prone to eating disorders
or to where tracking macros is causing you
a lot of daily stress.
You know, it’s really interfering with your
social life or just causing a lot of obsessive
thought patterns to come up.
I'm not an expert on eating disorders but
if you are someone who is prone to getting
overly preoccupied with food then I wouldn’t
recommend tracking macros in that situation
and you'll most likely be better off sticking
with a looser system for nutritional tracking.
So that’s my overall current view on the
issue of nutritional tracking.
I hope that gave some useful insight that
you can apply to your own program.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to lay out an effective
bulking or cutting phase from A to Z using
that, sort of, nutritional approach along
with concrete meal plans, workout routines,
supplement guides and one-on-one coaching
then you can check out my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by visiting
www.BTBluePrint.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
Make sure to follow me Facebook and Instagram
as well for more daily tips.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And if you did enjoyed the video make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment, and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.