What’s going on, guys.
Sean Naelwanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and the question being answered today is do
artificial sweeteners cause weight gain?
So it’s of course very common for people
following fitness programs to include artificially
sweetened drinks and food items in their diet
as a substitute for regular sugar, because
it’s a way to control calorie intake.
But even though most of those sweeteners are
basically zero calorie, there’s still conflicting
information out there about whether or not
they actually have negative effects on fat
gain.
So the short answer here is very simple, and
that is that in terms of direct effects, there’s
no research out there to show any causative
relationship between the consumption of artificial
sweeteners and changes in body fat levels.
So all things equal, if you took to people
who are both eating 2,000 calories a day and
one of them consumed no artificial sweeteners
at all while the other person did, there’s
no evidence to show that there would be any
difference in the changes in body composition
between the two; So, no known direct effect.
Where it gets a little more complicated is
the possible indirect effect where the consumption
of artificial sweeteners can produce behavioral
changes in some people that then cause them
to go and consume more total calories from
their diet.
There’s actually a lot of conflicting research
out there on this topic but there are three
main ways that this could possibly happen.
The first is if the person consumes zero calorie
sweeteners and then uses that as a justification
to overeat on something else.
And that results in more total calories being
taken in.
So let’s say they were out at the restaurant,
and they had diet soda with their meal, they
might think that because they had a diet soda
as opposed to a regular one that that makes
it okay to eat, let’s say a serving of fries
that they otherwise might not have had.
And the total calories in the fries is higher
than what they would have taken in had they
just drink regular soda with no fries.
That just one example.
So some people might think that because they’ve
replaced certain sugary items with artificial
sweeteners they’ve now earned the right
to go and eat high calorie foods.
The second possibility is the theory that
artificial sweeteners don’t trigger the
brain’s food reward pathway in the same
way that regular sugar does.
There’s conflicting research on this, but
some studies have shown that since artificial
sweeteners don’t have the same satiating
effect that people are looking for when they
eat or drink, that that would cause the person
to then go out and seek out more food and
end up adding significantly more calories
to their total intake.
Again, the studies on this are mixed.
Some showed increase in appetite and others
showed no effect at all.
So again, this is just one possible theory.
And the third possibility is the fact that
peoples flavor preferences change with repeated
exposure to certain taste.
So if you start eating more salty food for
a few weeks then you’ll start to crave salt
more often, and vice versa.
So the idea here is that by constantly having
that strong sweet taste from the artificial
sweeteners that could lead to an increase
in cravings for sweet foods and sweet drinks,
and you end up taking more total calories
in that way.
So to sum up all of this, there’s no known
direct effect between artificial sweetener
consumption and fat gain but in some people
it could have indirect effects that caused
them to end up consuming more total calories
from their diet in the big picture and gain
fat from that.
now, that said, on average the research still
does show that people who replace sugary drinks
with zero calorie sweetened drinks do end
up losing weight more often than not.
And secondly these studies are just looking
at general population and not specifically
at fitness minded people following a muscle
building or fat loss program.
So, if you’re someone who understands the
basics of calorie and macro nutrient intake
and you’re conscious of what you’re taking
in and what you require for your goals then
it’s a lot less likely that those indirect
effects are going to be an issue for you.
The bottom line here is that if you consume
artificially sweetened drinks or foods or
supplements in your program as a way to control
calories and you aren’t experiencing any
problems in terms of appetite or cravings
then I don’t see any reasons to worry about
it.
On the other hand, if you do have issues in
these areas then reducing your consumption
of artificial sweeteners could potentially
be something to experiment with.
Although the argument could also be made that
having those sweet zero calories items would
reduce cravings because it lets you experience
that sweet taste without the extra calories.
So really it just comes down to the individual
and it’s something that you can figure out
for yourself to see what maximizes your own
personal adherence to your nutrition plan
long term.
So, I hope you guys found this video helpful.
Make sure to follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
You can grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
that includes my recommended step-by-step
training, nutrition and supplementation plans
to maximize your muscle building and your
fat burning progress.
The link for that is in the description box.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, comment and subscribe if
you did find the information helpful.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.