Should you train a muscle with a 
higher frequency to consistently  
spike muscle protein synthesis and 
thereby keep yourself more anabolic.
Using the current science, we'll assess this.
First and foremost though, what 
is muscle protein synthesis  
and why is keeping it elevated 
important for muscle hypertrophy?
Within your muscles, muscle protein synthesis 
and muscle protein breakdown are always ongoing.
Muscle protein synthesis is the 
creation of new muscle proteins,  
while muscle protein breakdown is 
the degrading of muscle proteins.
Bob the builder and Thanos can 
help us understand this further.
Imagine we have a wall. Bob the builder 
is laying new bricks to the wall.
Thanos, on the other hand, is destroying bricks.
In this analogy, the wall is the muscle,  
and bob the builder is carrying out muscle 
protein synthesis (he is adding new bricks),  
while Thanos is carrying our muscle 
protein breakdown (he's destroying bricks).
When bob the builder and Thanos are adding and 
removing bricks respectively at the same rate,  
the wall remains the same size.
In correct terms, when muscle protein 
synthesis is equivalent to the amount  
of muscle protein breakdown, the 
muscle remains the same size.
When bob the builder adds bricks 
faster than Thanos can destroy them,  
the wall increases in size. That is,  
when muscle protein synthesis exceeds the rate of 
muscle protein breakdown, muscle size increases.
Finally, when Thanos destroys bricks faster than 
bob the builder can add bricks, the wall decreases  
in size. That is, when muscle protein breakdown 
exceeds the rate of muscle protein synthesis,  
muscle size decreases. This unfortunately 
occurs in aging inactive individuals.
A resistance training session evokes 
an increase in muscle protein synthesis  
and shifts the balance to muscle protein 
synthesis exceeding muscle protein breakdown.
But how much does muscle protein synthesis rise 
and last after a resistance training session?
A review study by Damas et al. combined 
the current data investigating this,  
and established training 
experience seems to matter.
For trained individuals, muscle protein 
synthesis peaks a few hours after a session,  
and by 10 hours the levels have rapidly fallen.
Untrained individuals peak in muscle protein 
synthesis elevations close to 20 hours after  
a session, have a greater area under the 
curve compared to trained individuals  
(meaning greater muscle protein 
synthesis elevations overall),  
and they also still display fairly decent 
elevations 40-50 hours after the session.
All this makes sense, untrained 
individuals have greater muscle  
growth capacity than trained individuals,  
resistance training is more novel for untrained 
folks and is going to disrupt their systems more.
Nevertheless, based on this data, trained 
individuals might want to train a muscle  
every other day, while untrained individuals 
may want to train a muscle every 3rd day.
Doing so would ensure muscle protein 
synthesis is consistently elevated.
What we've just done, examining the timecourse 
of muscle protein synthesis and deriving  
training frequency recommendations, is 
commonly what others do to support the  
idea of training a muscle more frequently 
(that is, training a muscle every other  
day for trained individuals or training 
every 3rd day for untrained individuals).
But, there are a couple of 
problems with all of this.
Firstly, the data formulating the timecourse of 
muscle protein synthesis elevations for trained  
and untrained individuals comes from studies 
looking at mixed muscle protein synthesis.
Mixed muscle protein synthesis includes 
all the proteins within muscle fibers,  
much of these proteins are not 
involved in muscle hypertrophy.
We care about myofibrillar proteins,  
the contractile proteins within muscle fibers 
that produce muscle force. It's an increase in  
the number of contractile proteins that 
conventionally signifies hypertrophy.
Returning to the Bob the 
builder and Thanos analogy,  
it's most accurate to say when 
myofibrillar protein synthesis  
exceeds myofibrillar protein breakdown, 
we then get an increase in muscle size.
Here's the thing, myofibrillar protein synthesis  
and mixed muscle protein synthesis 
do not correlate with each other.
Demonstrating this, Burd et al. had 
subjects perform the leg extension for  
4 sets of repetitions to failure with 
either a 90% or 30% one-rep max load.  
24 hours after this, mixed muscle 
protein synthesis levels were unchanged,  
but myofibrillar protein synthesis 
levels were significantly elevated.
Therefore, it makes no sense to 
use mixed muscle protein synthesis  
data to derive training frequency recommendations.
This begs the question: what does the myofibrillar  
protein synthesis response look like 
after a resistance training session?
The Damas et al. review study combined two studies 
and established this graph. The time course of  
myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations were 
similar between trained and untrained individuals  
(it peaked 5hrs after training), but the magnitude 
of elevation was lower in trained individuals.
For both trained and untrained folks,  
myofibrillar protein synthesis was 
still elevated 16 hours after training.
Unfortunately, neither of 
the two studies involved in  
this graph established when myofibrillar 
protein synthesis returned to baseline.
Does any other data help us out?
Before trying to answer this, there 
is yet another problem on our hands.
Myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations are also 
impacted by the amount of muscle damage present.
A different study by Damas et al. found 
across 10 weeks of resistance training,  
much of the myofibrillar protein synthesis 
elevations in the initial training sessions  
were likely directed mainly towards repairing 
muscle damage and not building muscle.
However, as muscle damage levels gradually 
decrease as the training weeks go by  
(this is thanks to the body producing adaptations 
that make you resilient to muscle damage), the  
myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations after 
training was correlated with muscle hypertrophy.
To rephrase all of this, when 
muscle damage levels are very high  
(as they would be when you first expose yourself 
to a novel training stimulus), much of the  
myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations are 
directed to repairing damage, not building muscle.
But when muscle damage levels 
are low or non-existent,  
then myofibrillar protein synthesis 
elevations correlate with muscle hypertrophy.
What this means is if we want 
to establish the time course of  
myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations 
that are directed towards building muscle,  
we're going to want to look at data that has 
ensured muscle damage is low or non-existent.
Two papers have technically done this.
The aforementioned Damas et al. study found after 
a training session in the 10th week of training  
(a time point at which muscle damage was low),  
myofibrillar protein synthesis was still 
elevated 48 hours after the session.  
The researchers unfortunately did not 
take any more measures after 48 hours.
Another study by Miller et al. had subjects 
perform one-legged kicking on specialized  
equipment for one hour at 67% 
of their maximum workload.
This protocol caused no signs of muscle damage,  
probably because I think it was 
purely concentric resisted training.
Myofibrillar protein synthesis was still 
elevated 72 hours after the session.  
Unfortunately, no further measures 
were taken after 72 hours.
Therefore, from this limited data, 
myofibrillar protein synthesis (when  
corrected for muscle damage) seems to last 
at least up to 48-72 hours after training.
On the whole though, it's clear to see it's more 
or less impossible to derive training frequency  
recommendations from the current research 
examining myofibrillar protein synthesis.
We've been assuming you'd want to wait 
until muscle protein synthesis has subsided  
to low levels until we train a muscle again and 
restimulate muscle protein synthesis elevations.
But it's entirely possible there's nothing wrong  
with training a muscle again when its 
protein synthesis levels are elevated.
There's no data (to my knowledge) 
demonstrating this is detrimental,  
but I should also note there are no data 
to my knowledge showing this is viable.
Future research would need 
to examine this further.
Throughout this video, we've 
also been ignoring the impact  
of the number of sets you perform for a muscle.
The number of sets you perform for a muscle 
in a session likely impacts the magnitude  
of myofibrillar protein synthesis 
elevation, and this could potentially  
render the idea of frequently stimulating 
myofibrillar protein synthesis unimportant.
For example, say you perform 
9 weekly sets for your biceps.
You could perform these sets across 3 days a week,  
with each session involving 3 sets. 
Presumably this creates a fairly  
consistent elevation of biceps muscle 
protein synthesis throughout the week.
However, you could perform all 
9 sets in a single session,  
creating one large biceps 
muscle protein synthesis spike.
When comparing these two scenarios, perhaps 
the overall amount of muscle protein synthesis  
(technically called the area 
under the curve) is the same,  
meaning both methods produce similar hypertrophy.
This is a possibility. But unfortunately there’s 
limited data that can verify or falsify this.
The idea training a muscle more frequently can 
produce more hypertrophy via more consistent  
muscle protein synthesis elevations is 
not truly supported by current data.
This doesn't mean training more frequently 
provides no muscle growth benefit.  
It’s possible future research indicates 
myofibrillar protein synthesis elevations  
(once adjusted for muscle damage) are overall 
greater when training a muscle more frequently.
Using our previous example comparing performing 
9 sets in one session to performing 3 sets  
across 3 days, maybe there could be a 
limit to the amount of muscle protein  
synthesis that can be stimulated per session.
For example, 9 sets might be too much 
and past a certain threshold per session,  
meaning some of the sets you 
perform are essentially “junk”
Therefore, net weekly muscle 
protein synthesis will be greater  
by distributing this volume across more 
days per week. You avoid “wasted sets”.
Regardless, the main point of this 
video is it's clear the current muscle  
protein synthesis data is insufficient to 
derive training frequency recommendations.
Opposed to the muscle protein synthesis 
data, it’s much better to explore the  
actual research comparing muscle growth after 
subjects train with different frequencies.
We’ll be diving into this literature 
next video to figure out if there’s an  
optimal training frequency for muscle hypertrophy.