Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj of EliteImpactLabs.com
here with another Muscle in Minutes Q & A,
where I answer your body building and fitness
questions in 2 minutes or less. So today's
question comes from Ruji, and he wants to
know if eating white rice is okay as part
of a muscle building or fat burning diet,
or should he be switching over to brown rice
instead. So 9 times out of 10 when you talk
to a "fitness expert" they're going to give
you the automatic answer that you should be
eating brown rice instead of white rice, and
there's 3 major reasons for this. The first
is that brown rice is a slower absorbing carbohydrate,
so it's going to be less likely to cause excess
fat gain. Secondly brown rice is more micronutrient
dense. Third, brown rice is higher in fiber.
So let's go through each one really briefly.
The first is on the issue of absorption speed.
You have to keep in mind that when you combine
your carbohydrates with proteins and fats
the absorption speeds are signficantly reduced.
Yes, white rice does have a higher glycemic
index ranking, which means that when consumed
in isolation in a fasted state the sugars
will be asorbed at a faster rate, but how
often do you ever go 16 hours and then eat
a bowl of white rice and nothing else? Any
time you eat carbohydrates you're pretty much
always going to be combining them with protein
and probably some fats as well, and that's
going to reduce the absorption rate significantly,
so the issue of absorption rate in terms of
brown and white rice is ultimately irrelevant
in the big picture. The second is the issue
of micronutrients. Yes, brown rice is more
micronutrient dense than white rice is, but
most white rice that you buy is fortified
with additional vitamins and minerals, and
if you're eating a balanced bodybuilding diet
that includes fruits and vegetables and you're
taking a multivitamin, at the end of the day
your micronutrients needs are going to be
met anyway. And finally is the issue of fiber.
Yes, brown rice does have a little bit more
fiber than white rice does, I don't know the
exact numbers but I think that brown rice
has about 3 grams of fiber per cup and white
rice has about a gram of fiber per cup. Now
fibre is beneficial, you do want to make sure
you're getting enough fiber in your diet,
so that's the one thing to take into consideration.
But again if you're eating a balanced bodybuilding
diet and you're getting fiber from other sources,
at the end of the day your fiber needs are
going to be met anyway. So the simple answer
to this question of white rice vs brown rice
is to just choose the one that you personally
prefer, the one that you think tastes better
and the one that makes you feel better. I
know alot of people who eat brown rice, myself
included, tend to feel kind of bloated after
eating it, and so they prefer white rice,
so just pick the one that you like better,
it's as simple as that. So I hope you found
the information in this video useful. If you
have a question that you would like answered
just head over to the EliteImpact Labs Facebook
Page and leave your question there. I'll either
answer it on the page or I'll make a video
response just like this one. If you did find
this information useful please make sure to
like and comment and subscribe to stay up
to date. Also make sure to grab your 28 day
mass building plan over on EliteImpactLabs.com
which includes a free workout, meal plan and
supplement guide, and make sure to join us
over on Facebook for daily videos, articles,
tips and free supplement giveaways. So thanks
again for watching and I'll talk to you again
soon with more free tips.