Hey guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com – www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
This picture behind me is literally a complete
coincidence but this is just sort of quick
follow up here to yesterday’s video where
I talked about vegan bodybuilding diets.
This question popped up in the Q&A video that
I did a while back and that question was basically
just asking what my thoughts are on vegan
protein powders.
There are a lot of different ones out there,
a pretty good portion of them are based on
combinations of pea protein and brown rice
protein but there are a lot of other forms
as well.
There’s hemp, soy, quinoa, potato but in
any case how do vegan protein powders compared
to whey, egg or casein and can you use them
as part of your muscle building diet.
Whether it’s because you actually are a
vegan or just because you get certain negative
effects when you use regular animal based
protein powders.
Very simple answer here, I would say that
plant based protein powders when used as part
of a complete balanced diet where you’re
getting enough total daily protein in a variety
of different sources to ensure that you’re
getting all of the individual amino acids
that you need.
They’re completely fine to use just as a
way to help you hit your protein needs for
the day.
Now it is true on an individual gram for gram
basis that an animal based protein powder
like whey or casein will have superior amino
acid profile and a higher absorptions rate
in comparison to a plant based protein.
However in the context of an overall diet
where you’re consuming enough total daily
protein for your goals it’s really just
not going to matter in the bigger pictures.
That’s because as long as you’re getting
enough total protein per day through a variety
of different sources, you’ll already be
getting enough absorbable protein and enough
of the individual amino acids that you need
to optimize muscle recovery and growth.
Remember that your body can only use and your
body only needs a limited amount of protein
over any given period and consuming more protein
and more amino acids than your body can actually
utilize that’s not going to somehow boost
your results further.
If you take a look the research that is available
on protein intake for athletes and bodybuilders,
and I will link some references in the description
box below.
The required numbers are actually a lot lower
than most people think.
Like I mention in that last video, 0.8 grams
per pound of body weight daily will be enough
for most people.
If vegan wants to be fully on the safe side,
since plant based protein are less absorbable
then they could increase that to 0.9 grams
or one gram just sort of as a cautionary thing,
but almost certainly there’s no scenario
where more than one gram per pound of body
weight would be needed.
I mean if there was some bizarre scenario
where you could only consume, say 50 grams
of protein per day and you had to make the
absolute best of that, then in that case whey,
egg or casein would be the better choice.
But if we’re talking about a normal standard
bodybuilding diet where you’re getting enough,
a sufficient amount of overall daily protein
then a vegan protein powder is completely
fine to use for whatever you reasons might
be.
You can easily find reasonably priced vegan
protein powders that will give you just as
much protein per scoop as whey.
I’ve actually experimented with a few different
ones lately just to see what they’re like
and I found that when I blend them up with
my smoothies, with fruit, veggies, oats, nuts,
butters and whatever else they taste just
as good too.
So not much else to say on that.
Vegan protein powders are totally fine to
use.
So thank for watching guys.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
Make sure to follow me on social media.
Hit that like button if you enjoy the contents.
Leave a comment, share, subscribe, all that
good stuff and my complete Body Transformation
Blueprint can be accessed by clicking here.
Or by using the link in the description box
or by just going direct to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
Talk to you guys again soon.