What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and today I wanted to quickly discuss the
topic of fiber intake by going over what the
benefits of fiber are and how much fiber you
should be eating per day for optimal results.
This is something that a lot of people really
don’t pay much attention to, and the average
fiber intake in the U.S. for adults is only
fifteen grams per day which is quite a bit
below the ideal recommended amount.
So, fiber is generally considered as a type
of carbohydrate.
Some people will classify it differently but
that’s not really an important issue here.
It’s broken down into two categories, which
are soluble fiber; which is the type that
dissolves in liquid and is digested by your
body.
And the other type is insoluble fiber, which
doesn’t dissolve in liquid and it passes
right through your body unabsorbed.
I don’t want to bore you with a big lengthy
discussion about all the specific health benefits
of fiber, but just to sum it up, there’s
of course the well known benefit of keeping
you regular which improves colon health because
it moves food through your intestines at a
more efficient pace.
It also improves heart health by decreasing
blood cholesterol levels and it also helps
to control blood sugar levels as well.
Now, in terms of direct benefit for someone
following a body building and fitness program
the main benefit of fiber would be for those
who are on a cutting diet and are trying to
lose fat.
And that’s because proper fiber intake helps
to control your appetite and keeps you feeling
fuller throughout the day.
A lot of higher fiber foods are going to be
high in bulk but low in calories, and so they
fill your stomach up without adding a huge
amount of calories to your overall intake.
And then on top of that fiber also turns into
a gel-like substance once it gets into your
stomach, and that slows down gastric emptying;
meaning that the food empties out of your
stomach at a slower rate.
And that’s also going to help you to stay
full for longer.
Now, how much fiber should you eat per day?
A good general guideline, the one given by
the Institute of Medicine is 14 grams of fiber
per 1,000 calories eaten.
So if you’re eating 2,000 to 3,000 calories
per day that would be about 30 to 40 grams
of fiber in total.
I’d say that 20 grams should be the minimum
amount that you want to shoot for each day.
And about 60 grams would be the maximum unless
you have a very high carbohydrate intake that
exceeds 500 grams, in which case you could
bump it up to about to 70 or 80 grams.
But keep in mind that just because some fiber
is good doesn’t automatically mean more
is better.
And if you consume too much fiber you can
actually end up with negative side effects
like mal-absorption of certain nutrients.
That’s because some of the digestive enzymes
in your body can’t access the food properly.
As well as negative effects on digestion which
can bloat you and give you gas and constipation
and other effects that you don’t want.
I wouldn’t worry about specifically tracking
your intake of each specific type of fiber,
because that’s just going to over complicate
things and it isn’t really necessary.
And I just stay the focus on the total grams
of fiber that you eat per day.
There are a lot of different high fiber foods
that you can choose from.
Things like vegetables, fruits, beans, whole-grains,
rice, oats, et cetera.
I’ll put a list of high fiber foods in the
description box that you can check out as
a reference as well.
So, I hope you guys found this helpful.
Just the quick nutrition tip for you to make
sure that you don’t overlook your fiber
intake, because it is an important part of
an overall balance diet that should be taken
into account.
If you guys found the video helpful then feel
free to hit the like button, share it, comment
and subscribe.
You can grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
if you want to get a fully structured, science
based training nutrition and supplementation
plan to maximize your progress.
The link is in the description box for that.
Make sure to follow me on media here if you
aren’t already.
And the official website is www.SeanNal.com
where you can get all of my latest contents
and other updates.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.