Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this video
I want to give you a quick tip when it comes
to accurately tracking your calories and macros.
So, if you’re truly serious about transforming
your body in the fastest and in the most efficient
way possible, then proper dietary tracking
is pretty important.
If you’re trying to create a calorie surplus
that optimizes lean muscle growth while minimizing
fat gains, or a proper calorie deficit that
optimizes fat loss while minimizing muscle
loss, then you do need to be tracking your
food intake with a reasonable level of accuracy
each day.
However, if you’re trying to go about this
by using typical measuring cups or spoons,
then there’s a very good chance that you’re
actually missing the mark without even realizing
it.
And this is because measuring cups are intended
to measure volume rather than weight, and
depending on the shape of the particular item
that you’re trying to measure out, how hard
you press or what angle you pour at, measuring
cups and spoons can often be very inconsistent
and end up providing you with quite a few
more or quite a few less calories than you
think you’re actually getting.
Now this may not be a big deal if it only
happens here and there, but if you add up
these inaccurate measurements over the course
of a full day or a full week then it truly
can have a real negative impact on your bottom
line results.
When you consider the fact that consistently
gaining new muscle or losing fat on a weekly
basis comes down to just a few hundred calories
give or take each day, you’ll quickly see
how important this really is.
So, if you want to precisely track your overall
calorie and your overall macronutrient intake
in order to fully maximize your results, then
you need to be using a food scale when weighing
out your portions.
For example, 1 cup of brown rice should deliver
about 195 grams of total weight and provide
215 calories.
But measure out that 1 cup of rice using a
regular measuring cup and then measure the
actual weight using a food scale, and you’ll
often find that the amounts differ by quite
a bit.
Or take 1 tablespoon of peanut butter as another
example.
That should provide you with 15 grams of total
weight and about 100 calories, but since most
people’s idea of a “tablespoon of peanut
butter” varies quite a bit, you’ll often
end up with total calorie amounts that range
all over the map.
So the only way to know for certain that you’re
getting the correct amount of rice or peanut
butter or oatmeal or pasta etcetera is to
simply weigh it out on a food scale first.
Now, I understand that the use of a food scale
might sound overly “obsessive” to some
people, so I should mention the following
points.
First off, using a food scale is actually
very easy and it really doesn’t require
any more time or hassle above and beyond using
regular measuring cups.
Secondly, using a food scale really is the
only way for you to accurately determine exactly
how much protein, carbohydrates and total
calories you’re taking in each day.
If you are training hard at the gym and putting
in the effort to consistently stick to your
meal plan, then the last thing you’d want
to do is accidently sabotage your results
by simply not measuring out your portions
correctly.
And finally, all of the information here assumes
that your goal is to achieve the very best
results possible by fully maximizing muscle
growth while minimizing fat gains, or by fully
maximizing fat loss while minimizing muscle
loss.
It certainly is still possible to achieve
significant results without precisely measuring
your food out every day as long as you’re
able to estimate with decent accuracy.
However, your margin for error will increase
by quite a bit, and it’s far more likely
that you’ll end up out of your optimal calorie
and macronutrient ranges.
So, the specific level of dietary tracking
that you personally decide to employ is up
to you and it does depend on how serious you
are about your indvidual results.
One thing is for certain though, and that
is that if you want to fully optimize your
results and transform your body as quickly
and as efficiently as possible, then proper
dietary tracking your food is a must, and
using a food scale is definitely the best
way to go about it.
I don’t have any particular food scale that
I recommend at the moment, but just aim for
one that measures both grams and ounces and
that also has a “reset to 0” feature as
well because that makes it a lot easier to
use.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn everything that you need
to know about proper muscle building and fat
burning nutrition so that you can structure
an optimal meal plan that will maximize your
results, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete Body Transformation Blueprint
System.
You can do that by clicking the icon at the
top of the video or using the link in the
description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.