What's up guys.
Sean Nalewanyj, realscienceathletics.com and
in this video today I want to talk about the
hidden danger.
Yes, the danger of progressive overload when
it comes to building muscle.
Before I jump into it, if you enjoy the no
nonsense science-based content that I put
out here and you want to support the channel
while maximizing the effectiveness of your
fitness program at the same time, then you
can check out my sports nutrition company,
Real Science Athletics, which unlike most
of the poorly formulated junk out there in
the industry nowadays, offers 100% evidence-based
supplements you can trust to optimize your
muscle building and fat burning results.
Just head over to realscienceathletics.com
and you can use coupon code YouTube10 to save
10% off your entire first order.
So, like I've talked about a thousand plus
times before because it's just so important
to understand, make no mistake, progressive
overload is the underlying driver of the entire
muscle building process.
It's not about getting a pump, or feeling
the burn, or making yourself as tired and
sore and sweaty as possible following your
workout.
Those are automatic byproducts of striving
for progressive overload, but they aren't
the actual limiting factors in the growth
process.
The central limiting factor in the growth
process is that you consistently improve on
your training performance over time because
that's what actually forces your body to adapt
and grow to higher and higher levels.
And unless you're a more advanced lifter,
those performance increases should primarily
be in the form of basic linear weight and
rep increases.
You essentially just need to focus on getting
stronger over time on all the key lifts.
And when you combine that with a small calorie
surplus and sufficient protein, if your numbers
in the gym are consistently going up, then
you are going to consistently grow along with
it.
There's just no way around it.
You're going to make all kinds of gains.
Damn man.
Look at that.
We making all kinds of gains.
Now that's all well and good, but the big
mistake I see a lot of lifters making is that
they hear this idea that size and strength
are directly related, which for the most part
they are, and just like most people out there
who are going after a specific goal that's
important to them, they want to get there
as quickly as they possibly can.
And so they end up rushing the process and
trying to increase their strength at too quick
a pace.
And the natural consequence of that is that
they end up slowly sacrificing form just for
the sake of lifting a heavier weight.
Now, depending on what exercise you're doing,
that could mean that the activation of the
targeted muscle ends up being sacrificed because
you're just heaving the weight around using
a ton of momentum and other muscle groups
end up taking over.
But even more importantly than that is that
the risk for injury goes way up.
And this is a topic that I think actually
doesn't get enough attention because in reality
it's actually a baseline factor in the muscle
building equation.
In order to train with weights to build muscle
the first prerequisite is that your joints
and connective tissues have to be healthy
enough for you to do that in the first place.
And if you do get injured, it's going to slow
down your rate of progress in the longterm
since you'll have to take time off to heal.
And depending on the severity of the injury,
it could permanently negatively affect your
training efforts moving forward.
So the bottom line is this, any time you add
weight to the bar, your form with that heavier
weight should look exactly the same as it
was with the previous weight.
Right?
Like if you set up a camera and you recorded
your sets for 10 successive weight increases,
they would all look identical in terms of
the form being used.
So that means you're not using any additional
momentum to make the lift easier.
The rep cadence is the same.
So you're not speeding up the negative gradually
over time.
You're using the same full range of motion,
so you're not gradually cutting it down by
an inch or two or more out of the bottom of
each lift.
It also means that the overall technique being
used is the same as well.
So if any of those factors are significantly
changing after you've increased the weight,
then that's not true strength progression
and it just means that you're trying to move
too quickly and that you need to slow down
and take things at a more gradual pace.
Keep in mind that you don't need to be adding
more weight to the bar every single workout
or even every single week.
Even performing just one extra rep with the
same weight is meaningful progression when
you extrapolate it over time.
So the basic general approach I recommend
is to just train for additional reps with
a given weight.
And then once you hit the upper end of your
targeted rep range, increase the weight by
five pounds or even less if possible, if it's
on a smaller isolation lift.
And then just go back to training for reps
again and just repeat that process.
You really don't need anything fancier.
So it could look something like this.
Week one, you bench press 175 pounds for five
reps.
Next week, 175 pounds for six.
Next week, 175 pounds for seven.
Then you increase to 180 and go for five reps
again, then six then seven.
Then increase to 185 and so on.
And this is just referring to the first set
of the exercise.
You don't necessarily have to perform the
same number of reps across every single set.
So use your first set as your primary gauge
for progression on a given lift, and then
on subsequent sets of that lift it's possible
that you might get fewer reps or that you
might even have to reduce the weight slightly
to stay within your targeted rep range.
But treat that first set as the most important
one, and then once you've hit the upper end
of your targeted rep range on that first set,
then the following workout you'd increase
the weight also on that first set.
Now this is all just a rough guideline obviously.
It's hard to assign an exact rate of progression
that will apply to everyone because it really
depends on the individual in terms of their
experience level, their calorie intake.
It depends on the specific exercise because
bigger compound movements are obviously going
to go up a lot faster than smaller isolation
lifts will.
And you'll also probably have little quantum
leaps here and there where you just come back
and feel really strong on a given lift on
a particular day for some reason, and you're
just able to add weight straight away and
still match or even exceed the previous week's
reps, or the opposite can happen as well.
But I think as a ballpark guideline, if you're
consistently adding one rep per week and then
increasing the weight every two to three weeks
or so, maybe slightly longer depending on
the exercise, while maintaining perfect form
of course, then I'd say that if you're doing
that you are generally on the right track.
Again, it doesn't sound like much between
any two individual weeks, but you stack that
up over six months, one year, two years and
so on, and you'll see that it does add up
quite a bit.
So if you're serious about your muscle building
goals and you want to maximize your chances
for success in the long term, then play the
longterm game.
Slow down.
Realize that this is something you're going
to be doing for the rest of your life.
Realize that progressive overload is the central
factor when it comes to building muscle, and
that increasing your strength on the compound
lifts is what's going to add muscle to your
frame at the fastest rate, but at the same
time, don't be in a rush and don't try to
add weight too quickly because it will eventually
backfire.
The quality of your training will gradually
decrease and you'll be hugely increasing your
risk for injury as well.
True strength progression means that your
form remains exactly the same whether you're
lifting a 100 pounds, 200 pounds, or 500 pounds,
and it should look identical regardless of
the load.
Progressive overload is the primary driver
of hypertrophy, but only if it's being applied
properly.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to learn exactly how to tie this all together
in terms of a fully structured workout plan,
including the weekly split, exercise layout,
volume, rep ranges and more so that you can
achieve progressive overload and build muscle
as efficiently as possible, then make sure
to take my physique quiz over at quiz.seanNal.com
because that will hook you up with the proper
step-by-step workout plan as well as the proper
nutrition plan for you based on your individual
body type goals and experience probably.
You can click up at the top of the screen
for that or use the link in the description
box below.
You can also follow me over on Instagram as
well for more daily tips and updates.
It's @Sean_Nalewanyj and as always, make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe if you haven't already in order
to stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.