With the same exercise, performing it 
one way can produce drastically more  
muscle hypertrophy than performing it another way.
This is because the current data demonstrate 
that the length you train a muscle  
at can profoundly influence the 
amount of hypertrophy produced.
In this video, we'll explore this current data, 
discuss some notable considerations, and then  
figure out how you could leverage this literature 
to enhance hypertrophy with your exercises.
Allow us to first examine a recent study 
by Sato et al., demonstrating how biceps  
hypertrophy can powerfully be enhanced 
by training at a certain muscle length.
Part 1: Sato et al.
Sato et al. recruited 32 individuals who had 
not been training at least in the last 6 months  
and assigned them to either a long 
length, short length, or control group.
We won't mention the control group from hereafter. 
They did not train and expectedly made no gains.
Both the long length and short length groups  
trained the dumbbell preacher 
curl twice per week for 5 weeks.
The long length group trained the exercise 
from 0 to 50 degrees of elbow flexion.  
This trained the biceps at a long 
length. That is, a stretched position.
The short length group trained the exercise 
from 80 to 130 degrees of elbow flexion. This  
trained the biceps at a short length. 
That is, a more contracted position.
Now, many of you are probably thinking what about 
a full range of motion group? Unfortunately,  
the researchers did not have a full range of 
motion group. But we'll return to this point soon.
Both groups, each session, performed 3 sets of 10 
repetitions with 3 minutes of rest between sets.
What about loads? What loads 
did the subjects train with?
The way the researchers prescribed loads 
was slightly unique and not typical.
For the long length group, before 
the study, they measured the amount  
of maximal isometric force they could 
produce at 50 degrees of elbow flexion.
This value was then used to determine 
what dumbbell load they trained with,  
and it varied throughout the total 
10 training sessions they completed.
In the first session, the long length group 
trained with a dumbbell load equating to 30%  
of their maximal isometric force 
at 50 degrees of elbow flexion.  
This progressed to 100% by 
the 10th and final session.
For the short length group, opposingly, 
the researchers measured the amount of  
maximal isometric force they could produce at 
90 degrees of elbow flexion before the study.
This value was then used to determine 
what dumbbell load they trained with.  
Like the long length group, they trained 
with 30% of the maximal isometric force  
in the first session, and this progressed to 
100% by the 10th and final training session.
Before and after the study, elbow 
flexor thickness was measured at 50%,  
60%, and 70% of the approximate upper arm length.
Additionally, the average of these three locations  
was taken to obtain a single average 
elbow flexor thickness measurement.
I should note the elbow flexors in this case  
not only includes the biceps 
muscle, but also the brachialis.
What the researchers found was that increases 
in elbow flexor thickness at 50% and 60% of  
the upper arm length were similar between 
both groups. But, increases in elbow flexor  
thickness at 70% of the upper arm length 
were greater for the long length group.
Averaging these three elbow 
flexor thickness regions,  
the long length group saw significantly greater 
increases versus the short length group.  
Gains were approximately 3x 
greater for the long length group.
Part 2: What about Full ROM?
Now, a question everyone probably 
has is how would have this partial  
range of motion at long lengths 
compared to a full range of motion?
We can't be certain simply as the Sato et al. 
study never had a full range of motion group.  
But, does any other research help us out?
Most of the studies looking at a 
full range of motion have compared  
it to only a partial range of 
motion at short muscle lengths,  
and they have found a full range of motion 
is superior for overall hypertrophy.
However, notice how I said most of the studies. 
There is indeed one study by Pedrosa et al.  
evaluating how a partial range of motion at long 
muscle lengths compares to a full range of motion,  
and it suggests a partial range of motion 
at long muscle lengths could be superior.
This group of researchers had previously untrained  
women train the leg extension with 
one of four different programs.
A long length group trained the leg extension 
from 100 to 65 degrees of knee flexion,  
which trains the quadriceps at a long length.
A short length group trained the leg extension 
from 65 to 30 degrees of knee flexion,  
which trains the quadriceps at a short length.
A full range of motion group trained the leg 
extension from 100 to 30 degrees of knee flexion.
Finally, a varied group alternated 
back and forth between training the  
long length and short length 
leg extension every session.
Before and after the study, cross-sectional 
area of the vastus lateralis and rectus  
femoris was each measured at 40%, 50%, 60%, 
and 70% of the approximate thigh bone length.
Overall, the long length group saw the greatest 
gains, with the varied group being a close second.
More precisely, at 40% of the thigh bone 
length, increases in rectus femoris and  
vastus lateralis cross-sectional area were 
statistically similar between all groups.
But at 50% of the thigh bone length, increases 
for the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis  
were similar between the long length and varied 
group but both greater than the other two groups.
At 60% of the thigh bone length, increases for 
the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis were  
similar between the long length and varied 
group but greater than the two other groups.
Finally, at 70% of the thigh bone length, 
increases for the rectus femoris and  
vastus lateralis were greatest for the long 
length group compared to all other groups.
Therefore, this study qualifies as evidence that 
a partial range of motion at long muscle lengths  
might be more powerful than a full range of 
motion for stimulating muscle hypertrophy.
Part 3: Other data
I think it's worth the viewer being aware there 
is a fair bit of other evidence demonstrating  
that training a muscle at a long length 
evokes more hypertrophy than short lengths.
An analysis by Oranchuk et al. combined 
the results of 9 studies looking at how  
hypertrophy is impacted by training isometrically 
at long muscle lengths or short muscle lengths.
Overall, hypertrophy was greater 
when training at long muscle lengths.
Another study by McMahon et al. had a long length  
group train leg extensions from 
90 to 40 degrees of knee flexion,  
and a short length group training leg 
extensions from 50 to 0 degrees of knee flexion.
Increases in cross-sectional area of the vastus 
lateralis at 25% and 50% of the approximate thigh  
bone length were not statistically different 
between the long and short length groups.  
But, increases in cross-sectional area of the 
vastus lateralis at 75% of the approximate  
thigh bone length were significantly 
greater for the long length group.
Finally, Maoe et al. either had subjects 
train the lying leg curl or seated leg curl,  
with both executed from 0 to 
90 degrees of knee flexion  
(which is more or less a full range 
of motion for both movements).
Now, as 3 of the 4 hamstring muscles cross 
both the hip and knee joints, seated leg curls  
(due to the hip flexion it involves) would stretch 
these muscles much more than lying leg curls.
The other hamstring muscles (the biceps 
femoris short head) only cross the hip  
joint and thus is likely at a similar length 
between the lying and seated leg curls.
It was found that volume increases in the 3 
hamstring muscles that cross the hip and knee  
joint were significantly greater after training 
the seated leg curl versus the lying leg curls.
The other hamstring muscle, 
the biceps femoris short head,  
experienced similar volume increases between 
training the lying and seated leg curls.
This study demonstrates that even with 
the same overall joint range of motion,  
selecting an exercise that can achieve 
a greater stretch of a muscle can  
evoke significantly more muscle hypertrophy.
Part 4: Regional Hypertrophy Differences
Before discussing some considerations of the 
data we've overviewed, and then the potential  
takeaways, it's worth noting much of the 
data we've overviewed shows there are notable  
differences in regional hypertrophy between 
training at long and short muscle lengths.
The studies by Sato, Pedrosa, and McMahon 
indicate that growth of the upper or  
middle portions of a muscle is fairly similar 
between training at a long and short length,  
or slightly greater when 
training at a long length.
However, in the more lower regions of a muscle,  
training at a long length produces substantially 
more growth than training at a short length.
Part 5: Some Considerations
It's worth noting in all the data we've overviewed 
assessing differences between training at a long,  
short, or with a full range of motion, the biceps, 
quadriceps, and hamstring muscles were evaluated.
I think it's likely for muscles 
belonging to the arms and legs,  
and perhaps even the chest, training at 
a long length would produce significantly  
more hypertrophy than training at a short length.
However, for some muscles, such as some 
back muscles, and the trap muscles,  
not only is it probably difficult to find suitable 
exercises to train these muscles at a long length,  
but would training at a long length 
even be superior for these muscles?
For example, I have a hard time believing 
partial rowing of any kind in the lower  
position would produce more growth than full 
range of motion rows where you can contract  
and squeeze the back muscles. Moreover, would 
partial shrugs in the lower portion produce  
more hypertrophy than full range of motion 
shrugs where you can squeeze the traps.
The point here is I feel it’s 
completely possible some muscles,  
like the back and traps, might not necessarily 
benefit from being trained at a long length. But,  
I could completely be wrong. Hopefully 
future research examines this further.
Part 6: Takeaway
For many muscles, specifically those belonging 
to the limbs and probably the chest as well,  
I think it's very likely training at long 
muscle lengths is going to be superior for  
overall hypertrophy compared to 
training at short muscle lengths.
Furthermore, it's quite possible using a 
partial range of motion at long lengths  
produces more hypertrophy overall than 
training with a full range of motion.  
But, this conclusion is only 
derived from a single study.
As a result, I don't believe we can confidently 
conclude training a partial range of motion at  
long lengths is 100% of the time going to be 
more hypertrophic than a full range of motion.  
More research is going to need 
to be conducted in this area.
Based on your interpretations of the data,  
you might actually wish to experiment with 
partial range of motion at long lengths.  
It's clear to see this type of partial range 
of motion will produce robust hypertrophy.
At the very least though, with many of your 
exercises that train the muscles of the limb  
(and perhaps the chest muscle too), 
focusing on exercises and ranges of  
motions that can meaningfully load the muscle 
in a stretched position is likely a great idea.
For example, as per the Maeo et 
al. study overviewed earlier,  
seated leg curls are going to 
be better than lying leg curls.
With squatting exercises, trying to 
go as deep as you comfortably can  
is likely going to be better for 
overall lower body hypertrophy.
With deadlift exercises, if you'd like to 
achieve the most hamstring growth from them,  
ensuring you do not excessively bend the 
knees and choosing a variation that allows  
you to achieve significant hip flexion (such as 
stiff-legged deadlifts) is likely a good idea.
Of course, as noted, I think it's 
completely possible some muscles  
(like some of the back muscles and maybe the 
traps) might not necessarily grow more with  
training at long lengths. But again, future 
research is needed to falsify or verify this.