In this video, we aim to establish whether you're  
missing out on superfast gains by 
not performing superslow training.
Traveling back to the 1980s, it's claimed an 
individual named Ken Hutchins, upon conducting  
resistance training research on older women with 
fragile bones, developed superslow training.
Super slow resistance training seemed 
to be ideal for this demographic,  
as one article claims Hutchins stated "these women 
were so weak we were afraid for their safety".
What precisely is superslow training?
I ran across a PDF authored by Ken Hutchins, 
on which he makes a distinction between  
superslow training as a protocol and 
superslow training as a philosophy.
As a protocol, superslow training simply 
refers to performing exercises with a  
10-second lifting duration and 
a 4-10-second lowering duration.
As a philosophy, superslow training 
appears to be a whole training methodology.  
Ken notes sessions should not exceed 30 minutes, 
3-7 days of rest are required between sessions,  
among a few other factors.
Environmental factors are also mentioned,  
with Ken, quite intriguingly, believing 
training sessions should be devoid of music.
Other sources also state that superslow workouts 
typically only comprise one set per exercise.
Though superslow training seemingly 
has formal origins in older women,  
Wikipedia states, something like 
the superslow training was used  
by bodybuilders and powerlifters to 
break plateaus well before the 80s.
Of course, these claims are difficult to verify.
Now, there are indeed many similarties 
between superslow training,  
Arthur Jones' high-intensity training, 
and even training recommendations from  
other individuals such as Dr. Dough 
McGuff's stuff from "Body by Science".
In the future, I do plan to assess these 
other training methodologies in more depth.
But in this video specifically, we'll be 
focusing on the protocol of superslow training.  
That's the 10-second lifting and 4-10-second 
lowering repetition tempo recommended.
When I say superslow training from hereafter, know 
I'm merely referring to THIS repetition tempo.
So, is superslow training a superior way 
to develop muscle hypertrophy and strength?
Allow us to explore the existing literature. 
First, we'll examine superslow training's  
effectiveness for strength development, and then 
its effectiveness for hypertrophic adaptations.
A 2001 Westcott et al. study is often cited as  
evidence for superslow training being 
a potent strength-building stimulus.
In the paper, two studies are described.
Both studies involved just over 70 
previously untrained men and women  
(their ages ranged from 25-82).
They were assigned into either 
a superslow or regular group.
Both of these groups trained 
a range of nautilus machine  
exercises 2-3 times per week for a total of 8 
weeks (in study 1) or 10 weeks (in study 2).
The exercises performed each session were the leg 
extension, leg curl, leg press, neck flexion, neck  
extension, pullover, chest press, chest crossover, 
lateral raise, biceps curl, and triceps extension.
The regular group, each session, performed 
each exercise with 1 set of 8-12 repetitions,  
with each repetition consisting of a 
2-second lifting and 4-second lowering tempo.
The superslow group, each session, 
performed 1 set of 4-6 repetitions,  
with each repetition consisting of a 10-second 
lifting and 4-second lowering duration.
Both groups, throughout the study duration,  
attempted to gradually increase the load 
they used on their exercise sets within the  
variables prescribed to them (in other 
words, they progressively overloaded).
Before and after the study, the 
regular group's strength was tested via  
measuring the maximum load they 
could lift for 10 repetitions,  
with each repetition consisting of a 
2-second lifting and 4-second lowering tempo.
Conversely, the superslow group's 
strength was tested via measuring  
the maximum load they could 
lift for a single repetition,  
with that repetition consisting of a 
10-second lifting and 4-second lowering tempo.
In study 1, these tests were done 
with all of the trained exercises.  
In study 2, these tests were 
done only with the chest press.
In both studies, on average, the superslow group 
experienced greater strength gains. As noted by  
the authors, the superslow group saw roughly 50% 
more strength gains versus the regular group.
So, there we have it. Superslow training is 
optimal for evoking strength adaptations.
Not so fast.
As with all studies, limitations exist, 
and there is one very notable limitation.
As many of you likely noticed, the strength 
tests were different between both groups  
(in terms of repetition numbers 
and the repetition tempos used).
Generally, most people think of strength as the 
maximum load a person can lift on an exercise  
without using any deliberate tempo, rather the 
person just attempts to lift as much as they can  
(this is typically called a 
person's one-repetition maximum).
This begs the question: how would typical 
one-repetition maximum strength gains  
look between the superslow and regular groups?
Fortunately, another study by 
Keeler et al. examined this.
14 previously untrained women (with an average  
age of 32) were allocated into 
a superslow or regular group.
Both groups trained a range of 
exercises 3 times per week for 10 weeks.
The exercises performed each session were the 
leg extension, leg curl, leg press, bench press,  
seated row, biceps curl, triceps 
extension, and lat-pulldown.
The regular group,  
each session, performed each exercise for 1 set 
of 8-12 repetitions with an 80% one-repetition  
max load, with each repetition consisting of a 
2-second lifting and 4-second lowering tempo.
The superslow group, each session, performed  
each exercise for a single set of 8-12 
repetitions with a 50% one-rep max load,  
with each repetition consisting of a 
10-second lifting and 5-second lowering tempo.
Both groups, throughout the study, attempted 
to increase the load they used to maintain  
their respective relative loading (again, an 80% 
one-rep max load for the regular group and a 50%  
one-rep max load for the superslow group).
Before and after the study, one-repetition 
maximum while not using any deliberate tempo  
(just trying to lift the maximum weight) on all 
trained exercises were evaluated for both groups.
For 5 of the 8 exercises, the regular group 
experienced much greater strength gains.  
For the other 3 exercises 
(the row, triceps extension,  
and biceps curl), strength gains were not 
statistically different between both groups.  
Though, it's still worth noting the percentages 
still appear to favor the regular group.
Therefore, this study indicates for 
increasing one-repetition maximum strength,  
superslow training is suboptimal.
These findings are logical.
Superslow training, because of the very slow 
repetition tempos, would require you to train  
with relatively light loads (that is, a lower 
percentage of your one-repetition maximum).
This matters as the current data 
indicate training with heavier loads  
(80% one-repetition maximum or heavier) 
evokes greater one-repetition maximum  
strength gains compared to 
training with lighter loads.
Such findings are intuitive. If you want 
to increase the maximum load you can lift,  
training with heavy loads should 
promote this more than lighter loads.
As such, I think for individuals wishing to 
maximize their one-repetition maximum strength,  
simply training with heavier loads, and 
aiming to move them as fast as you can,  
is a sound recommendation.
Now, this does not mean super slow training is 
utterly useless for anything strength-related.  
Recall the Westcott et al. study found 
that for increasing the maximum load  
you can lift WHILE using a 10-second 
lifting and 4-second lowering tempo,  
training with this very tempo was 
extremely effective at accomplishing this.
Consequently, if an individual wish to maximize 
the loads they can lift with a superslow tempo,  
superslow training is probably going 
to be the best way to accomplish this.  
This information may be particularly useful 
for those who simply cannot train with very  
heavy loads (due to underlying conditions or 
as they simply dislike heavy load training).
Progressing on, is superslow training 
superior for muscle building?
As of right now, I'm only aware of one 
study by Schuenke et al. exploring this.
19 previously untrained women (with an average  
age of 21) were assigned to 
a superslow or regular group.
Both groups trained the leg 
press, squat, and leg extension.  
Each for 3 sets, 2-3 times per week for 6 weeks.
The regular group performed each exercise set 
with 6-10 repetitions, using an 80-85% one-rep  
max load, with each repetition consisting of a 
1-2-second lifting and 1-2-second lowering tempo.
The superslow group performed each exercise set 
with 6-10 repetitions, using a 40-60% one-rep  
max load, with each repetition consisting of a 
10-second lifting and 4-second lowering tempo.
Both groups rested for 2 minutes 
between sets. Also, if subjects  
could perform more than their prescribed 
repetition numbers, loads were increased.
By the end of the study, growth of fast and 
slow-twitch muscle fibers from the vastus  
lateralis (part of the quadriceps) 
was greater for the regular group.
Correspondingly, this data interestingly  
suggests superslow training might be 
suboptimal for evoking hypertrophy.
Some may be thinking this is likely 
due to the use of the light loads  
(40-60% one-rep max loads) by the superslow group. 
However, as we've examined in previous videos,  
loads between 30% and 80% one-rep max 
produce similar muscle hypertrophy  
when repetitions are performed very close or to 
failure (as was more or less done in this study).
Due to this, the use of the light 
loads per se, by the superslow group,  
likely would not be sufficient 
to explain these results.
So what does?
There is another potential explanation, 
we'll explore this shortly.
But first, I wanted to critically examine 
a rationale superslow training proponents  
sometimes put forth as to why they believe 
superslow training is superior for hypertrophy.
Namely, they claim superslow training creates 
more tension in a muscle for a given workload.
Tension (that's mechanical tension) is equal 
to the force generated by muscle fibers.
Something called mechanosensors within 
muscle fibers can detect these forces  
and transduce them into a signaling cascade 
that results in muscle fiber hypetrophy.
Based on this, to maximize overall muscle 
growth, we'd want to recruit as many  
muscle fibers as possible and have them sustain 
fairly decent forces for a sufficient duration.
Superslow training proponents believe a 
superslow tempo accomplishes this best,  
due to the force-velocity relationship.
The force-velocity relationship states 
that faster muscle contractions result  
in less force production, while slower muscle 
contractions result in greater force production.
Consequently, a superslow tempo, 
due to the slow muscle contraction,  
maximizes the amount of force a 
muscle can produce. Put another way,  
it maximizes mechanical tension and 
thus is superior for building muscle.
However, I believe this is a misapplication 
of the force-velocity relationship and  
is more than likely misleading. 
Let's establish why I think this.
It's essential to recognize 
the conditions in which the  
force-velocity relationship was established.
It can be established with unfatigued isolated 
muscle fibers contracting a single or few times  
at different velocities. For example, when 
maximally stimulating a fiber at different  
shortening velocities, force outcomes are in 
line with the force-velocity relationship.
It can also be established when comparing  
unfatigued muscle contractions at 
different forces or velocities.
As a simple example, compare performing one 
rep with a 90% one-rep max load to with a  
30% one-rep max load. Despite you trying to 
move both of these loads as fast as you can,  
your muscles will generate more force and 
contract slower against the 90% one-rep max load.  
This is in line with the 
force-velocity relationship.
However, these aforementioned conditions in which 
the force-velocity relationship applies are very  
different from lifting a constant light load 
to or very close to failure, and they do not  
mean that lifting this constant light load slowly 
will result in greater muscle force production.
Henneman's size principle helps us understand why.
Different types of muscle 
fibers exist within a muscle.  
These different types of muscle fibers can 
likely be categorized across a spectrum.
On one end are slow-twitch muscle fibers,  
which generally produce low forces 
but are highly fatigue resistant.
On the other end are fast-twitch muscle fibers,  
which generally produce high 
forces but are highly fatigable.
Henneman's size principle indicates 
when muscle force requirements are low,  
only recruitment of slower-twitch muscle fibers 
is necessary. But, as force requirements increase,  
or you near failure while attempting 
to sustain a given force output,  
those faster-twitch muscle fibers 
are incrementally recruited.
Here's the thing, with a given light load, lifting 
it slower actually reduces the force requirements.
Force is equal to mass multiplied by acceleration. 
In our case, mass mainly refers to the load used.  
Using a slower tempo will reduce your 
acceleration during a repetition,  
thus resulting in lower force requirements.
A study by Schilling et al. demonstrates this.
They found when a national weightlifter 
performed the back squat with 170kg,  
using a 10-second lifting 
and 4-second lowering tempo  
produced lower mean and peak propulsive forces 
compared to using a maximal lifting speed
Consequently, lifting light loads with a slower  
repetition will actually result in 
low mechanical tension INITIALLY.
However, notice I said initially.  
Using slower repetition tempos is not 
necessarily suboptimal for hypertrophy.
Recall not only do force requirements 
determine the number of muscle fibers recruited  
(as well as the force produced 
by recruited individual fibers),  
but your proximity to failure while trying 
to sustain a given force output does as well.
With a given light load, although 
using a slower repetition tempo  
will involve less force production 
compared to using a faster tempo,  
as you continue to perform repetitions 
and get closer and closer to failure,  
the recruitment of more muscle fibers (as well 
as probably increased force production by some  
recruited individual fibers) must occur for you to 
try and sustain repetitions with this given load.
As a result, regardless of whether a 
faster or slower repetition tempo is used,  
so long as repetitions are 
performed very close or to failure,  
you likely end up recruiting a similar 
number of muscle fibers and potentially  
exposing the individual recruited 
fibers to comparable levels of force.
Put another way, mechanical tension 
likely ends up being similar.
So, to summarize this 
hypertrophy discussion so far,  
it's very likely superslow training DOES 
NOT produce more mechanical tension.
Rather, it's likely so long as repetitions 
are performed very close or to failure,  
slower repetitions tempos would be similarly 
effective to faster repetition tempos.
However, if this is true, why did the Schuenke 
study find superslow training to be suboptimal?
First and foremost, it's worth 
noting this was only a single study.  
Also, limitations and 
considerations exist within it.  
As one example, the subjects were previously 
untrained women, meaning it's not clear  
if the results obtained would apply to 
individuals outside of this demographic.
Even so, let us put forth a 
potential hypothesis behind  
why superslow training could 
be suboptimal for hypertrophy.
As noted moments ago, it's likely so long 
as repetitions are performed very close or  
to failure, slower repetitions tempos would be 
similarly effective to faster repetition tempos.
In most cases, I believe this 
statement is true. For example,  
a meta-analysis by Schoenfeld et al. found that 
individual repetition tempos between 0.5 to 8  
seconds produced similar muscle hypertrophy when 
repetitions were performed to or close to failure.
However, there might be a problem with 
using individual repetition tempos  
beyond the 8-second range (which 
is done with superslow training).
This problem is central fatigue.
Remember, the reason your muscles produce 
force is thanks to the electrical signals  
they receive from the central nervous 
system (the brain and spinal cord).
Central fatigue refers to fatigue during exercise 
that decreases the number of electrical signals  
sent to the muscle. At the level of the 
muscle, this means a reduction in muscle  
fiber recruitment and/or a reduction in the 
force generated by recruited individual fibers.  
Put another way, central fatigue 
can lower mechanical tension.
Contrary to what most people seem to believe, 
light load and longer-lasting contractions  
generate more central fatigue versus higher 
load and shorter-lasting contractions.
As an example, Yoon et al. 
et al. had 9 men and 9 women,  
on separate days, perform a contraction 
of their biceps at either 20% of their  
maximum voluntary contraction force or 80% 
of their maximum voluntary contraction force.  
They held each contraction until force 
declined by 10% of the target force.
On average, subjects held the 20% contraction 
for around 14 minutes before they could no  
longer produce the required force, whereas the 80% 
contraction was only held for around 25 seconds.
But, the 20% contraction produced greater 
central fatigue than the 80% contraction.
Now, as we've already noted in this video,  
loads as light as 30% one-rep max produce 
similar hypertrophy to 80% one-rep max loads,  
when repetitions are performed 
very close or to failure.
Moreover, much of these studies had subjects 
use a 2-4 second individual repetition tempo.  
Thus, we can likely conclude any 
central fatigue generated within  
these training variables does not interfere 
with muscle hypertrophy and is perfectly fine.
Similarly, we've also already noted that 
individual repetition tempos between 0.5 to  
8 seconds are similarly effective for hypertrophy 
when repetitions are performed very close or to  
failure. In these studies, it seems mainly 
50% to 80% one-rep max loads were used.  
Thus, we can also likely conclude any 
central fatigue generated within these  
training variables does not interfere with 
muscle hypertrophy and is perfectly fine.
However, and this is the key 
point, perhaps superslow training  
(due not only to the light loads but probably more 
so the superslow repetition tempo of 10-second  
lifting and 4-10 seconds of lowering that would 
significantly extend the set duration) ultimately  
evokes excessive central fatigue levels that 
do indeed interfere with muscle hypertrophy.
Perhaps this explains the Schuenke study findings.
It's worth again emphasizing this is merely 
a hypothesis based on the findings of a  
single study. At the end of the day, future 
research would be needed to substantiate this.