Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And today, I want to do a quick review
of d-aspartic acid, and talk about whether
or not it is useful as a bodybuilding supplement.
So, as you probably already know, testosterone
is the most anabolic muscle building hormone
in your entire body. And it's one of the key
factors that determines how much muscle you
can ultimately build. More testosterone, more
muscle, less testosterone, less muscle. And
if you take a look, you'll find an entire
category of different herbs, and vitamins
and other compounds that promise huge increases
in testosterone for improved muscle growth,
fat loss and gym performance. Tribulus, longjack,
avena sativa, saw palmetto are just a few
of the more popular examples. Now, what do
all of these supposed testosterone boosters
have in common? Well, one very important thing,
they've never been demonstrated with any reliable
research to produce any significant increase
in testosterone levels. D-aspartic acid on
the other hand, does have data showing that
it can significantly raise testosterone level.
So, d-aspartic acid is an amino acid that
is found in humans and it plays a important
role in the production of luteinizing hormone
or LH for short and testosterone. LH is secreted
from your pituitary gland and it basically
signals your body to increase its production
of testosterone. D-aspartic acid is starting
to get a lot of traction in the bodybuilding
supplement world, because the research on
this amino acid has consistently shown around
30% to 40% increases in testosterone when
following a dosage of about 3grams per day.
In one Italian study, about 90% of the subjects
showed significant increases in LH at about
33%, and testosterone at 42%. Testosterone
levels were only slightly elevated after six
days. But they saw a large spike after 12
days. And they stay that -- stay that way
until three days after supplementation was
stopped. So, to the average lifter that sounds
pretty convincing. However, the reality here
is that testosterone levels would need to
be elevated to a far higher level than that
in order to see changes in muscle mass, fat
loss or overall body composition. And I'm
talking about increases of several hundred
to 1000% plus in testosterone. And there're
currently no data that shows a relationship
between d-aspartic acid supplementation and
increases in lean body mass or decreases in
fat, nor do I suspect that there ever will
be. And secondly is the issue of safety. D-aspartic
acid may turn out to be a perfectly safe supplement
in the long run, but there really isn't enough
human research available at this time to know
for sure. So, at this point I really wouldn't
feel comfortable recommending d-aspartic acid
to my viewers without further research. So,
the bottom line here in terms of its use as
a bodybuilding specific supplement, I can't
see any real reason to go out and buy a bottle
of d-aspartic acid at this point. The 30%
to 40% increase in testosterone it will going
to achieve is not going to positively affect
hypertrophy or fat loss. The only area where
d-aspartic acid supplementation might be
useful is as a libido enhancer. So, if you're
in the 35 plus age range, d-aspartic acid
may have some application in this area. However,
I'm only speculating here. I can't really
make any definitive recommendation either
way. Other than that, leave the d-aspartic
acid alone and stick to proven science-based
supplements with reliable track records such
as whey protein, creatine, beta alanine, multivitamins
et cetera. And if you do want to check out
some very high quality formulas in those categories,
I would highly recommend checking out the
small but effective product line that we offer
over on EliteImpactLabs.com. And I'll link
that in the description box below. So, thanks
for watching this bodybuilding video lesson.
I hope the information here was useful to
you. If you did enjoy the video, please make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up-to-date on future
videos. Also make sure to grab your free 28-day
mass building plan, which includes a free
workout plan, meal plan and supplement guide
over on EliteImpactLabs.com. I'll also link
that in the description box. And make sure
to join the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook page,
for daily videos, articles, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways. Thanks again
for watching. And I'll talk to you again soon
with more free tips.