Hey, guys, Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And in this video by very popular demand,
I'm going to be doing a review of intermittent
fasting. So, I'll be answering the question
of what is intermittent fasting? Does the
IF approach work for fat loss? Is it superior
to a standard four to six-meal per day cutting
diet? And do I recommend using it? Now, keep
in mind that there is a ton of potential research
to take into consideration here. And this
topic could be made extremely complicated
if we wanted it to be. So, I'm just going
to answer these questions as concisely and
to the point as I can. So, let's get started.
So, what is intermittent fasting? Well, to
put it simply, the IF protocol is a dietary
structure that alternates between an extended
period where no food is consumed at all, usually
16 hours or more, followed by a feeding window
where all of your daily calories are consumed.
So, there's no one single intermittent fasting
structure, and the fasting and non-fasting
periods can vary quite a bit depending on
which program you're using. One of the more
popular intermittent fasting diets out there
uses a 16-hour fast, followed by an 8-hour
feeding window, while another utilizes a 20-hour
fast, followed by a 4-hour feeding window.
And on the more extreme end are the people
who actually consume all of their daily nutrition
in a single sitting. So, secondly, does intermittent
fasting work? Well, the quick answer is yes.
Intermittent fasting is certainly a viable
nutritional approach for fat loss for a few
reasons. First of all, it allows you to maintain
a calorie deficit. A calorie deficit, which
is a state where the number of calories burned
exceeds the number of calories consumed, is
the ultimate bottom line for fat loss. And
any diet that creates and sustains a proper
calorie deficit is going to produce fat burning
results. Secondly, the available research
is fairly conclusive in demonstrating that
a high meal frequency does not raise resting
metabolic rate nor does it increase the thermic
effect of food. So, consuming two or three
meals a day, which is the number where most
intermittent fasting protocols will land you,
is completely acceptable from a fat burning
standpoint. And finally, as long as overall
24-hour protein, carbohydrate and fat needs
are being met, there is no threat of excessive
muscle loss as long as the diet is combined
with a proper resistance training program.
So yes, as long as your overall macronutrient
intake is nailed down, then consuming those
macro nutrients in an intermittent fasting
style interval is going to produce perfectly
good results. Next opt, is intermittent fasting
superior to a standard cutting diet? Now,
this is the real important question. Obviously
intermittent fasting diets work. But do they
work any better than a regular diet that evenly
spaces four to six meals or more throughout
the day? Well, the research here is mixed,
and it's -- it's inconclusive at best. At
this point, I can't really see any real reason
to suspect that an identical macronutrient
intake consumed using an IF protocol is superior
to a standard dieting approach when it comes
to overall fat loss. There is research indicating
that intermittent fasting can improve certain
aspects of overall health. But in this review,
we're obviously focusing specifically on fat
loss. So, why do so many people who failed
on previous diets swear by the results that
they've got using an intermittent fasting
approach? Well, the answer here is also pretty
simple. And that is that for many people,
an intermittent fasting approach is an easier
to follow method for maintaining a calorie
deficit over time. Again, long term fat loss
is ultimately a product of placing your body
into a prolonged calorie deficit. And any
dieting approach that accomplishes this effectively
is going to produce great results. Many people
find that employing a fasting period followed
by a shorter eating window, leads to greater
control in terms of hunger, energy levels,
mode and overall adherence to the diet. And
as a result, they feel better and they end
up with greater fat burning results. But the
only issue of diet adherence, two identical
individuals consuming identical macronutrients
would likely not experience any real difference
in fat loss whether they consume two, or four,
or seven, or nine or more meals per day. So,
the last question is should you use intermittent
fasting? Well, all things equal, the meal
structure that maximizes your mood, your energy
levels, your motivation and that controls
your appetite most effectively is going to
lead to the greatest long-term fat burning
results. So, if you find that an intermittent
fasting style approach accomplishes that for
you, then that is certainly the approach that
you should use. However, if you do prefer
spacing your meals evenly throughout the day,
don't make the mistake of believing that you
should switch to an intermittent fasting approach
despite this in order to super charge your
fat burning results. It all really just comes
down to personal preference and what works
best for you. So, 16 hours fasted, and followed
by 8 hours of eating, or three evenly spaced
meals, or 6 meals or 10 meals. If you're aiming
to maximize fat loss, all you really need
to focus on is hitting your macronutrients
for the day, and doing so using whatever structure
you personally prefer. So, I hope you found
this information here useful today. If you
did enjoy the video, as always please make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up-to-date on future
videos. And also make sure to join the Elite
Impact Lab's Facebook page, using the link
in the description box for daily articles,
videos, tips and free supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching. And I'll talk to
you again soon with more free tips.