I think it's fair to say the flat 
barbell bench press is one of the  
default go-to exercises for 
achieving chest hypertrophy.
But, just how well does the flat barbell bench 
press do at developing the overall chest?
Now, any muscle connecting the thorax to the 
shoulder and upper arm is considered a chest  
muscle, including the pectoralis major, pectoralis 
minor, subclavius, and serratus anterior.
Hereafter, we'll only be discussing the pectoralis 
major, mainly because the research we'll evaluate  
has assessed only this muscle. Besides, the 
pectoralis major constitutes the large bulk of the  
chest, and most tend to consider the pectoralis 
major synonymous with the chest musculature.
Focusing more on the pectoralis major, like any 
muscle, its attachments to bones enable body  
movement. When a muscle dynamically contracts, the 
attachments remaining stationary are the origin,  
while the attachments that move are the insertion.
The pectoralis major has a large number 
of origins, including the medial clavicle,  
sternum, ribs, the cartilage of those ribs, 
and the aponeurosis of the external oblique.
However, the insertion for all of the fibers 
stemming from the various origins generally  
inserts into the same location, 
the lateral side of the upper arm.
Interestingly, there is currently no universally 
agreed way to divide the pectoralis major.
Some consider the muscle to have 
three heads: the clavicular head  
(consisting of fibers originating from the medial 
clavicle), sternal head (consisting of fibers  
originating from the sternum), and a costal head 
(consisting of fibers originating from the ribs,  
their costal cartilages, and the 
aponeurosis of the external oblique).
Others consider the pectoralis 
major to have only two heads,  
a clavicular head (consisting of fibers 
originating from the medial clavicle)  
and a sternocostal head (consisting of 
fibers originating from the sternum,  
ribs, costal cartilages, and the 
aponeurosis of the external oblique).
For simplicity, I'll simply refer to the upper, 
middle, and lower regions of the pectoralis  
major from hereafter. If you like, you can simply 
think of the upper region as the clavicular head,  
the sternal head as the middle region, 
and the lower region as the costal head.
With all those clarifications out 
the way, how well does the overall  
pectoralis major develop in response 
to flat barbell bench press training?
Let us examine two studies exploring this.
Ogasawara et al. had previously untrained 
men perform the flat barbell bench press  
(with a 2x shoulder-width grip) for 3 sets of 
10 repetitions with a 75% one-rep max load,  
using 2-3 minutes of rest between sets, 3 
times each week for a total of 24 weeks.
Flat barbell bench press one-rep 
max was re-measured every 3 weeks  
to enable to readjust of the 
75% one-rep max training loads.
Across the pectoralis major, the researchers 
measured cross-sectional area at 25%  
(the upper region), 50% (the middle region), 
and 75% (the lower region) of its length.
On average, the upper region saw a 36.3% increase 
in cross-sectional area, the middle region a 37.3%  
increase in cross-sectional area, and the lower 
region a 40% increase in cross-sectional area.
Therefore, this study indicates the flat 
barbell bench press produces notable and  
near-equal growth across the upper, middle, 
and lower regions of the pectoralis major.
Progressing on the second study, Davies 
et al. recruited 5 men and 5 women  
with training experience. Approximately 
68% of the subjects had a flat barbell  
bench press one-rep max between 35kg and 93kg.
The flat barbell bench press was trained 
with 4 sets of 5 repetitions with an 85%  
one-rep max load, using 5 minutes of rest 
between sets, twice per week for 8 weeks.
Grip width was unfortunately not specified. Flat 
barbell bench press one-rep max was re-measured  
every 2 weeks, enabling the readjustment 
of the 85% one-rep max training loads.
The researchers measured pectoralis 
major thickness at three regions:  
the spaces between ribs 2 and 3 (the 
upper region), the spaces between ribs  
3 and 4 (the middle region), and the spaces 
between ribs 4 and 5 (the lower region).
On average, the upper region saw a 7.44% 
increase in thickness, the middle region  
a 10.06% increase in thickness, and the 
lower region a 7.45% increase in thickness.
Now, some of you may be wondering why 
these numbers are significantly lower  
than the percentages observed in the Ogasawara 
study. Many potential reasons explain this.
The Ogasawara study used previously untrained men, 
lasted 24 weeks, used these training variables,  
and measured cross-sectional area (which 
measures 2 dimensions of a muscle).
Whereas the Davies study used trained men 
and women, lasted only 8 weeks, used these  
training variables, and measured thickness 
(which measures only 1 muscle dimension).
Nevertheless, I still think it's fair 
to say the results of the Davies study  
(similar to the Ogasawara study) indicate 
the flat barbell bench press notably  
and near equivalently develops the upper, 
middle, and lower pectoralis major regions.
Combining the results of the two studies,  
the flat barbell bench press seems to be a great 
exercise for overall pectoralis major development.
These findings raise a 
potentially interesting question.
It's far from uncommon for individuals 
to feel their upper pectoralis major  
is underdeveloped despite flat 
barbell bench press training.  
Given the data we've overviewed, 
why would this be the case?
I think there could be a potential explanation.
In the two studies, we detailed 
the relative upper, middle,  
and lower pectoralis major gains experienced as 
a result of flat barbell bench press training,  
and concluded the movement seems to evoke 
near equal growth of these three regions.  
You can think of relative gains 
in terms of percentage changes.
However, in absolute gains, it actually 
seems the flat barbell bench press  
grows the upper pectoralis major region 
less than the middle and lower regions.  
You can think of absolute gains in 
terms of measurement unit changes.
To properly understand this,  
let us first more thoroughly explore 
the data from the Ogasawara study.
On-screen is the before and 
after training pectoralis major  
cross-sectional area measurements for 
the upper, middle, and lower regions.
As we know, in terms of percentage 
changes (that is, relative gains) all  
three regions experienced near equal 
changes (in the ranges from 36-40%).
However, in terms of centimeters 
squared gains (that is, absolute gains),  
the upper region only experienced 
a gain of 5.5 centimeters squared,  
whereas both the middle and lower region 
approximately saw a 10 centimeters squared gain.
This is interesting, why are the percentage 
gains similar between all three regions,  
yet the absolute gains show the 
middle and lower regions grew  
nearly double the amount versus the upper region?
The baseline absolute measurements explain this.  
Notice how before the study, the middle and lower 
regions are similarly sized (25-27 centimeters  
squared) but the upper region is quite a bit 
smaller (at around 15 centimeters squared).
With the same relative gains (again, percentage 
changes), the smaller the number you begin with,  
the lower absolute gains 
(again, measurement units,  
which is centimeters squared 
in this case) it experiences.
Therefore, the reason the upper pectoralis 
major region sees less absolute growth but  
similar relative growth is simply 
because it is smaller to begin with  
compared to the middle and 
lower pectoralis major regions.
The same case can be found with the Davies study.
All three regions experienced fairly comparable 
percentage increases. Yet, increases in absolute  
gains (which in this case is only centimeters, 
as thickness, a one-dimension measure,  
was explored in this study) were lower for the 
upper region versus the middle and lower regions.
These two studies collectively demonstrate that 
most individuals tend to have an upper pectoralis  
major smaller in size compared to the sizes 
of the middle and lower regions to begin with,  
probably creating the appearance the 
upper pectoralis major is underdeveloped.
Even though the flat barbell bench press provides 
a near equal relative stimulus to all three  
regions of the pectoralis major, because the 
upper region is smaller in size, it experiences  
less absolute growth and still remains smaller 
versus the middle-lower pectoralis major regions.
If this is a problem for an individual, that is, 
they wish for their upper pectoralis major region  
to be the same or greater size (in absolute 
measurements) to the middle and lower regions,  
they would want to train additional exercises that  
preferentially stimulate the upper pectoralis 
major region to help accentuate its growth.
Possible exercises that accomplish this include 
(but are not limited to) the incline barbell  
bench press, incline dumbbell bench press, 
elevated feet push-ups, and low cable chest fly.
All these exercises involve horizontal flexion 
(the flat barbell bench press also involves this),  
which is generally the function of 
all regions of the pectoralis major.
More critically though, they also involve a 
higher degree of shoulder flexion versus the  
flat barbell bench press, and the upper region of 
the pectoralis major specifically likely assists  
the anterior deltoid in this shoulder flexion, 
thereby likely meaning these four exercises  
preferentially recruit the upper pectoralis major 
region more than the middle and lower regions.