Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here , BodyTransformationTruth.com,
now this is actually a re-upload of a video
that I did earlier today, I feel like the
previous version was maybe a little bit harshly
worded, so I just wanted to re-do this and
make it a bit clearer of what I was trying
to say.
So the basic point I was just trying to make
was that for an average beginner who hasn’t
done a lot of research on their own when it
comes to bodybuilding and fitness supplements,
taking advice from sales people who work in
supplement stores and using that as your source
of research is very rarely going to be a good
way to determine which supplements you should
or should not include in your program.
Now obviously there are genuinely knowledgeable
and genuinely honest people out there who
work in supplement stores and who do the best
they can to give their very best advice, but
this is definitely the exception rather than
the rule, so if you are someone who is watching
this and who does work in a supplement store
and who does give good advice then this is
obviously not directed at you, but again,
the truth is that it is very rare to find.
I actually personally worked at a supplement
store over 10 years ago when I was first starting
out, a very big one that a lot of you might
shop at, and I know firsthand that there’s
basically no qualifications needed at all
to get hired there, you literally are not
required to have any prior knowledge about
supplements or nutrition, and many of the
people who work there don’t, and I have
no doubt that that’s true of a high percentage
of other supplement stores that you might
shop at.
Not only that, but a lot of these people literally
don’t even train, and yet they’re giving
advice about supplements and nutrition, and
even training sometimes to people who do.
And then on top of that they’re often paid
partially on commission, and different products
will have higher and lower commissions attached
to them, and the sales people there are encouraged
to push certain products over others, even
if that's not in the best interests of the
customer.
And of course your sales performance is also
being tracked so there’s a certain level
of pressure there to just sell a lot of stuff
period.
So my basic advice here is that if you’re
buying supplements locally, then just do your
research beforehand, know what it is that
you're going to buy before you go in there
and don’t make the mistake of thinking that
just because somebody happens to work in a
supplement store that they’re actually knowledgeable
about supplements or about proper nutrition,
in my experience of working in multiple stores
and also going in to shop for my own supplements
at literally hundreds of different stores
over the last 10 plus years, I can tell you
for sure that although some are knowledgeable,
most of them really don’t have a clue of
what they’re talking about.
It’s really not uncommon at all for people
to waste hundreds or even thousands of dollars
every year on supplements that literally do
nothing at all for their results, so I’m
just making this video to try and help you
save some money and to help you simplify your
program as well.
So bottom line, take some time to do your
own independent research, I have a ton of
evidence-based supplement videos on this channel
as well as over on my blog, I’ll link that
in the description box, examine.com is an
awesome resource, and also if you just want
a very basic primer about the supplements
that I recommend, again, I’m not affiliated
with any specific supplement companies, then
you can go ahead and grab my “no b.s fitness
supplement guide” using the link in the
description box below.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found the information helpful.
For more honest, science-based information
when it comes to proper muscle building and
fat loss training, nutrition and supplementation,
make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.