What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com and in this
video today we're talking about the subject
of foods that are the best for building muscle.
And I actually want to basically dispel the
idea by explaining why there's no such thing
as any single food or any single set of foods
that you need to include in your bodybuilding
diet to get the best results possible.
Before I jump into it, guys, make sure to
hit the subscribe button below to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
And also click the bell icon as well, that
way you'll be notified any time I upload new
content so that you don't miss out on anything.
So this is a pretty common type of article
or video that you'll see online.
You know, the top ten foods to gain muscle
or twelve super foods that build muscle fast,
that sort of thing.
And it is true that there are certain types
of foods you'll usually find in a typical
bodybuilding diet because they're more macro
friendly and more nutrient dense, but the
truth is that there's a virtually endless
list of different possible foods and food
combinations that you can use to meet your
daily nutritional needs and no single food
is a must by any means.
Remember that proper muscle building nutrition
isn't about one single food here and one single
food here and another one here, and this food
is good and this food is bad and that food
is in between.
It's not about single foods.
Instead it's about your overall intake for
the day as a whole in terms of the total calories,
the total macro, and micro nutrient content,
and the fiber.
That's how your body actually looks at it.
And so it's really just about knowing what
your total nutritional needs are for the day
and then using some combination of foods to
meet those needs.
It's pretty much just a numbers game when
it all comes down to it.
Now, you obviously want to be basing the bulk
of your diet around nutrient-dense, minimally
processed Whole Foods and getting in a few
servings of fruit and veggies in the mix.
Because it's not just about the grams of protein,
carbs and fats, but it's also about getting
sufficient fiber and micronutrients as well.
But no single food has any special properties
to where your bottom-line results are going
to be impacted based on whether you eat it
or not.
And when I first started lifting, because
of just bad information, I did fall into that
trap of thinking that I had to choke down
certain foods because they were the best for
building muscle.
And I thought that an effective bodybuilding
diet automatically was supposed to be bland
and boring.
So, I remember literally just eating tuna
straight from the can and hating every single
bite of it, or eating plain egg whites every
single morning even though I was totally sick
of them, or having, like, really bad tasting
meal replacement shakes that were marketed
as being the perfect muscle building meal.
And I did that for quite a while before realizing
just how unnecessary it really was.
The idea that a healthy diet should automatically
be un-enjoyable is a completely outdated concept.
Or you hear these quotes like, you know, food
is just fuel, or eat for results not for pleasure,
nothing tastes as great as being in great
shape, but this is all just BS really.
I'm not saying that you're going to be able
to sit there and eat high-fat, high-sugar
food all day long, you know, or that every
meal is going to taste like a cheeseburger
or an ice-cream sundae.
You can mix those things in moderation but
if you just take the time to plan things out
there's no reason why you can't legitimately
enjoy all of your meals throughout the day.
And even healthy macro friendly meals can
taste really good if you just put a bit of
effort into it.
So, just go through each main category of
foods; protein, carbs and fats, and pick a
few good options within those categories that
you most prefer and then just based your diet
around those foods.
So if you don't like tuna, then there's no
reason whatsoever to eat tuna.
If you're not a fan of eggs, don't eat eggs.
If you don't like oatmeal, or bananas, or
broccoli, then don't eat them.
No single food source is a must-have in your
plan.
And rather than thinking in terms of an individual
muscle building food, think more in terms
of an overall muscle building diet.
So if you really like, say, strawberries and
grapes then use those as your main fruit sources.
Or if you prefer turkey and salmon rather
than chicken and beef, use those as your primary
protein sources.
If you're a vegan then you don't need to eat
any of that.
You know, you can go with beans, lentils,
and tofu to hit your protein needs.
If you'd rather have sweet potato instead
of rice for your carb sources then go with
that.
And if you're still a beginner and you want
a good list of nutrient-dense macro friendly
foods that you can use to eat on your overall
nutritional need, then I'll just list some
ideas for you in the description box in order
to make things easier.
But just figure out your daily calorie needs
and your approximate macronutrient needs and
then use whatever combination of foods you'd
like.
And that list certainly isn't definitive but
it's just there to give you some ideas.
And if you're willing to just put in a bit
of extra time and effort then you can also
find tons of great tasting recipes and meal
ideas using those foods if you just search
around a bit.
You don't have to eat totally basic combinations
only, like chicken breast, rice, and green
beans.
I mean, that's fine if you enjoy it and you
prefer the simplicity, but there are a lot
of different sauces and flavorings you can
use.
I'll link a post I did on that in the description
box for you to check out, outlining twenty
low calorie sauces and condiments that you
can use to flavor your meals.
And again, lots of recipes out there, you
know, wraps, quesadillas, omelets, healthy
pizzas, fajitas, things like that.
And lots of sweeter dessert type stuff too
using, you know, protein powders, Greek yogurt,
oatmeal, there's just so many things to choose
from beyond a plain piece of protein and a
carb source with salt and pepper on it.
Just run a basic online search using Google,
YouTube, or any other social media platform
using terms like fitness recipes, bulking
recipes, cutting recipes, and you'll find
an endless variety of different options from
really simple recipes to more complex ones
that can be easily fitted into your nutritional
needs for the day.
And going about your diet in this sort of
way will get you the same bottom line muscle
building results, plus two huge benefits.
Benefit number one: is that you'll be way
more likely to stay consistent with your diet
over the long term.
Remember that building muscle isn't a quick
fix and if you want to get into great shape
and stay in great shape, it's a lifelong thing.
So if you take a look at your current diet
and you can't say that this is a way of eating
that you'd be happy to maintain over the long
term then something probably needs to change.
Food is just such a central part of our lives
and most people out there, unless they're
doing intermittent fasting, they're probably
eating three or more times a day.
And if eating is literally a chore because
you're forcing yourself to eat things that
you really don't like, there's a pretty good
chance that you are eventually going to burn
out and quit.
And then the second benefit, and it's a very
simple one but your life will just be way
better, I mean that's such an obvious thing,
but if you're eating four times a day and
you genuinely look forward to each meal and
you actually enjoy it, you know, I consider
my own diet to be fully enjoyable, that's
just a way better way of living than eating
four times a day and not enjoying it.
So by shifting your mentality to where you're
just viewing your nutritional intake in terms
of an overall day or an overall week and focusing
on hitting your calories and your approximate
macros from minimally processed Whole Foods
and then laying your diet out in the most
enjoyable way possible, you'll get better
muscle building results because you'll be
way more likely to stay consistent and your
day to day life will just be more fun and
enjoyable.
{period} And if you're literally doing dumb
things like I was, like choking down tuna
straight out of a can and forcing yourself
to eat foods that you really dislike, then
you're going to save mental energy and willpower
as well.
So, I hope this was helpful, guys.
If you want to learn all the details on how
to apply this way of eating to your muscle
building program along with concrete workouts,
meal plans, and supplement advice along with
one-on-one coaching, then you can download
my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here, or by heading over to www.BTBluePrint.com
using the link in the description box.
Make sure to follow me on facebook and Instagram
if you aren't already.
The links for that are below.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And feel free to hit the like button, leave
a comment, and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I'll talk to
you again soon.