What's up guys? This is Sean Nalewanyj of
EliteImpactLabs.com. And in this video lesson,
I want to talk a little bit about glutamine
supplementation. Now, glutamine is pretty
much been considered a stable bodybuilding
supplement for a really long time. And it's
usually mentioned in the same breath as other
proven supplements like whey protein, and
creatine, and beta-alanine, et cetera. Glutamine
is a non-essential amino acid, which means
that your body can produce it on its own,
and it becomes conditionally essential under
periods of high stress. Now, these are the
four main glutamine benefits that you're going
to hear about. The first is that it increases
protein synthesis. The second is that glutamine
strengthens your immune system following workouts.
The third is that it increases growth hormone
secretion. And the fourth is that it helps
to replenish post-workout glycogen levels.
Now, the reality here is that for average
guys, following an average muscle building
program, supplementing with L-glutamine is
pretty much a waste of money. And there's
a few major reasons for this. The first is
that 10% of your overall protein intake is
already being derived from L-glutamine, which
means that, you know, if your daily protein
intake was 150grams to 300grams, you're already
getting 15grams to 30grams of L-glutamine.
Secondly, the majority of orally consumed
L-glutamine doesn't even make it into your
bloodstream. And instead it's used by your
intestines for energy. Now, the percentage
will vary depending on how much glutamine
you consume, but the research seems to indicate
an average of about 65%. And thirdly and the
most importantly, the overwhelming majority
of the research that has been done on L-glutamine
has not shown any real benefits for bodybuilders
and athletes. And all the studies that I'm
about to mention in this video, I will reference
in the description box bellow. So, let's break
it down. Glutamine claim number one is that
glutamine supplements increase protein synthesis.
Now, this is true, but only in people that
are suffering from clinical stress, such as
trauma or burns. In these cases, glutamine
supplementation does enhance overall protein
synthesis. And it does seem to aid in recovery.
However, clinical stress and exercise-induced
stress are two very different things. And,
you know, spending an hour in the gym doing
bench presses and tricep extensions doesn't
put your body under nearly as much stress.
And the studies that have been performed on
healthy individuals haven't found any significant
increases in net protein synthesis. The second
claim is that glutamine strengthens your immune
system following workouts. Now, it is true
that, you know, glutamine does play an important
role in immune function. And high intensity
workouts do place stress on immune system,
and glutamine levels do increase following
workouts, roughly for -- they decrease by
about 20% for two to four hours after training.
However, the research has shown that post-exercise
immune suppression is not a result of low
glutamine levels. And that supplementing with
glutamine following your workouts does not
improve immune function. Claim number three
is that glutamine supplements increase growth
hormone secretion. There was a study in 1995
that showed that just 2grams of oral glutamine
can produce a four-fold increase in growth
hormone levels. Now, this sounds really good
on paper, and it's awesome, you know, an awesome
marketing tool for supplement companies, but
a 2001 follow up study showed that this had
no effects on lean body mass. So glutamine
does increase growth hormone levels, but not
high enough to have any real effect on your
bottom line results. Claim number 4 is that
glutamine helps to replenish post-workout
glycogen levels. And ultimately this is irrelevant
to begin with, because there's no necessity
for an average bodybuilder to immediately
replenish his or her glycogen levels following
workout. Weight training workouts actually
have a minimal impact on glycogen levels.
Usually, they'll drain glycogen by a maximum
of 30%. And your diet is going to naturally
replenish those glycogen levels by the time
your next workout comes around. So, this would
be a legitimate concern for hard training
athletes who workout multiple times per day,
but not for the average bodybuilder. And in
any case, glutamine still doesn't appear to
be any more effective at replenishing glycogen
levels post-workout than basic glucose. So,
instead of spending your money on post-workout
glutamine, you could just drink some orange
juice instead. An important distinction here
is to realize that it's not glutamine itself
that's worthless, we're talking about -- we're
talking specifically here about supplemental glutamine.
And, you know, glutamine itself makes up about
two-thirds of the amino acids in your muscle
tissue, and it performs a ton of valuable
functions related to muscle growth and overall
health. The point that I'm trying to make
in this video is that dumping 10grams to 20grams
of L-glutamine powder on top of the 15grams
or 30grams that you're already consuming daily,
plus all of the glutamine that your body produces
on its own, because remember it's a non-essential
amino acid, you know, doing that is not going
to help you build muscle faster. There are
only two very specific situations where 10grams
or 20grams of daily supplemental glutamine
might have benefits, "Might". And that is
-- the first is that glutamine might help
to spare muscle in people that are following
an, you know, an aggressive fat loss program,
which is aimed at getting body fat down to
very low levels. In this case the combination
of the prolonged calorie deficit and the intense
weight training cardio might put the body
under enough overall stress to warrant glutamine
supplementation. And the second is that glutamine
might help improve recovery in athletes who
are following an intense program and working
out multiple times per day. Again, the overall
stress here might be high enough in some of
these situations where glutamine benefits
would be noticeable. For everybody else, I
would just recommend that you forget about
glutamine supplementation as it's most likely
not going to do anything for you, besides
it costs you money, as simple as that. So,
thanks for watching this video lesson. If
you do want to check out some legitimately
effective research-based bodybuilding supplements,
you can check out the parts over on the Elite
Impact Lab store. The link is in the description
for that. Also make sure to join the Elite
Impact Lab's Facebook page, where we do free
supplement giveaways every Sunday night. And
make sure to subscribe to this YouTube Channel
to stay up-to-date on all future videos. So,
I hope you found this video helpful. And I'll
talk to you again soon.