Biceps curls are most commonly performed with 
weights, be it with dumbbells or barbells.
However, what if you saw someone doing this in the  
gym (show image of lifting no weight), 
bicep curling without any weight?
What if I told you that this can build muscle?
I'm not just talking about a 
small degree of muscle growth,  
rather potentially a similar amount 
to bicep curling with weight.
Sounds crazy right?
But let's examine a study by Counts 
et al. that inspired this video.
5 men and 8 women, all previously untrained, 
had one arm assigned to a no-load condition  
and their other arm assigned 
to a high load condition.
Both arms were trained three times per 
week (on non-consecutive days) for 6 weeks.
With the arm that was assigned to the no-load 
condition, they performed a biceps curl with no  
actual weight, but they aimed to squeeze and 
maximally contract the biceps throughout the  
curling movement. They did this for 4 sets of 20 
repetitions with 30 seconds of rest between sets.
Electrodes were placed on the biceps to give 
feedback of its activation, thereby encouraging  
participants to further maximally contract 
the muscle throughout the range of motion.
With the opposite arm assigned to the high load 
condition, they performed a dumbbell biceps curl  
with 70% of their one-repetition maximum. 
They did this for 4 sets of 8-12 repetitions  
with 90 seconds of rest between sets.
Thickness of the biceps was 
measured at three regions,  
roughly 50, 60, and 70% of the upper arm length.
What the researchers found was that 
at all three regions of the biceps,  
growth was similar between the no-load 
condition and high-load condition.
In other words, biceps curls with no load, but 
trying to squeeze and maximally activate the  
biceps throughout the curling motion resulted 
in similar gains to regular dumbbell curls.
These results are extremely interesting,  
before we speculate why this occurred, 
let's first address some limitations.
Firstly, some may suggest 
that the results of this study  
could be explained by the cross-education effect.
For those unaware, this is where 
training *only* one side of your body,  
can increase the strength and size of 
the opposite untrained side of your body,  
we have a whole video dedicated 
to this at House of Hypertrophy.
Therefore, some may suggest the 
muscle growth for the no-load arm  
was due to the cross-education effect obtained 
from training their other arm with high loads.
However, muscle growth seems to be extremely 
little with the cross-education effect.
For instance, this study by Hubal 
et al. had 243 men and 342 women  
train only one of their biceps with 
unilateral preacher and concentration curls.
The trained bicep increased in 
cross-sectional area by an average of 18.9%.  
However, the untrained bicep only increased 
in cross-sectional area by an average of 0.2%.
Therefore,  
it's highly unlikely the cross-education 
effect confounds the results of this study.
Moreover, as noted by Counts et al., it seems the 
cross-education effect is minimal or nonexistent  
when both sides of the body are trained with 
different protocols, as was done in the study.
Another potential limitation is the use 
of different rest interval durations.  
Recall the no-load arm performed 4 sets of 20 
repetitions with 30 seconds of rest between sets,  
while the high load arm performed 4 sets of 8-12 
repetitions with 90 seconds of rest between sets.
Some may suggest that the use of shorter 
rest intervals with the no-load arm  
is better for building muscle.
This is a possibility, however, this claim itself 
is not completely supported by the research.  
We have a whole video dedicated to the research on 
rest intervals for muscle growth on the channel.
As we noted, with isolation exercises 
(which is what a biceps curl is)  
research is conflicting on whether 
short or long rest intervals are better.  
Opposingly, with compound exercises, 
longer rest intervals appear to be better.
Therefore, all in all, it's hard to say if the 
use of different rest intervals in this study  
meaningfully impacted the results.
A final and notable limitation is that this study  
was conducted on individuals with 
no previous training experience.  
Therefore, we can't be certain if the results of 
this study can be applied to trained individuals.
Nevertheless, let us now explore the 
potential reason for the study's results.
I should note that if the following reasoning 
is true, then the findings of this study  
may indeed apply to trained individuals.
Currently, mechanical tension is the 
best-categorized stimulus for muscle growth.
Mechanical tension is simply equal 
to the force generated by a muscle.
Active tension is one important component of 
mechanical tension. Passive tension is the other,  
but for this video, we can ignore passive tension.
Active tension is the force generated 
by the contractile units of a muscle.
To understand this, we first need to 
understand the basics of a muscle's structure.
Muscles are organized in hierarchical  
layers (create an image with 
number list (or arrow diagram).
Within a whole muscle are 
fascicles, within fascicles  
are muscle fibers, and within 
muscle fibers are myofibrils.
Myofibrils consist of an array of sarcomeres, and 
sarcomeres are the contractile units of a muscle.  
In other words, they are what 
produce a muscle's force.
More precisely, when something 
called the myosin head,  
extends from the myosin filament and pulls 
on something called the actin filament  
towards the M-line, the sarcomere 
shortens and generates force.
Something called mechanosensors  
detects this force and goes on to initiate a 
signaling cascade that results in muscle growth.
Zooming out, we can see that high levels of active 
tension is a result of two components: the number  
of muscle fibers recruited and the amount of 
force generated by these recruited muscle fibers.
A high number of muscle fibers recruited 
means more sarcomeres are generating force,  
while a higher amount of force generated 
by these recruited muscle fibers  
means the sarcomeres are 
generating a high amount of force.
When training conventionally with weights, as 
you get closer and closer to failure (the point  
at which you cannot perform any more repetitions 
with a given weight), the number of muscle fibers  
recruited, as well as the force generated 
by some recruited muscle fibers increases.
Therefore, getting close to failure with 
a given weight creates high levels of  
active tension. As a side note, this is 
likely why both heavy and light loads  
can produce similar muscle growth, as discussed in 
other videos on the House of Hypertrophy channel.
Now, here's the main point, you can likely achieve 
high levels of active tension without any weight.
By simply moving a muscle through a range 
of motion while simultaneously trying to  
maximally contract and squeeze the muscle, you 
are forcing the recruitment of many muscle fibers  
as well as high force production by 
many muscle fibers. Put differently,  
you are self-inducing high 
levels of active tension.
Perhaps this explains why no-load bicep curls  
may be as effective as normal 
bicep curls with weights.
This brings up a fascinating question: are weights  
(or any other kind of external resistance) 
even needed to achieve optimal muscle growth?
If performing exercises where 
you simply maximally contract  
and squeeze a muscle throughout a range of motion 
provides a sufficient muscle-building stimulus,  
perhaps external resistances are not needed.
Of course, it's essential 
to recognize these thoughts  
are based on a single study. This is anything 
but definitive and overwhelming evidence.
Hopefully, we get more research in 
the future exploring this further,  
so we can truly gain a greater understanding of 
how effective this may be, especially in trained  
individuals. I most definitely plan to make 
future videos if any new research comes out.
Finally, it's worth mentioning 
that maximally contracting and  
squeezing a muscle through a range 
of motion is far from easy. Remember,  
you're trying to produce as much 
force with the muscle as possible.
In the Counts et al. study, it seems much 
of the subjects found that with a few of  
the sets, no-load training was harder and more 
uncomfortable than training with the dumbbell.
I highly recommend anyone to try out no-load 
training at least once, I think you'll notice  
how challenging it can be. Additionally, 
you may even notice quite a decent pump.
Thank you for making it to the end of the 
video, I hope the video was interesting  
and informative. Any of the following 
can significantly help out the channel:  
a comment, like, or share. Thank you again!