Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com
and this is part 5 of my bodybuilding and
fat loss Q&A.
As always you can use the links in the description
box below to access all of the other Q&A’s
that are available, there’s a lot of very
useful information there so make sure to go
ahead and check that out after you’re finished
with this video, and let’s get started.
So question #1 is, what are the very best
cardio exercises for burning fat in the most
effective way?
Well, ultimately, cardio is simply a calorie-burning
tool that you use in conjunction with proper
diet for the purpose of maintaining an ongoing
consistent calorie deficit over time, and
the truth here is that ANY form of exercise
that increases your heart rate and that allows
you to generate a reasonable amount of overall
intensity over a sustained period of time
is going to be an acceptable form of cardio
exercise when it all comes down to it.
And so for that reason, my recommendation
here is to just choose your cardio method
or methods, with the overall goal of adherence
in mind first and foremost.
In other words, just go with the forms of
cardio that you enjoy the most and that you’ll
be most likely to stick to over the long term.
You’ll still end up getting the same basic
results in the big picture this way, not to
mention that it will turn your day to day
training program into something that you’ll
actually look forward to and have fun with
as opposed to something that you just have
to “get over with”.
So if that means using regular traditional
gym equipment like treadmills and stair steppers
and bikes then that’s totally fine, but
it could also mean other activities as well,
things like swimming or jumping rope or heavy
bag work, it could mean playing sports a couple
times a week, it could mean drop-in classes
like spin or kickboxing or even fast paced
yoga.
Just make sure to use some basic common sense
here if building muscle size and strength
is a central goal of yours just by making
sure that whatever form of cardio you do choose
doesn’t interfere with your actual weight
training workouts.
So for example, you wouldn’t want to do
a rock climbing session before training back,
or heavy bag work before training say chest
and triceps.
Question #2, how should a training plan be
structured if the goal is to build just a
modest amount of muscle and achieve a more
“athletic” look as opposed to a bulky
“bodybuilder” look?
Well, whether someone is aiming to get as
big and strong as they possibly can or just
put on a more modest amount of muscle, the
basic workout plan that I’d give to either
person would ultimately be the same and it
would still be based on increasing muscle
size at the fastest possible rate, and this
is because achieving significant muscle growth
as a natural trainee is a very slow and very
gradual process, and intentionally trying
to slow down your rate of progress because
you’re afraid that you’ll get “too big”
is really just going to be counterproductive.
A standard rate of actual lean muscle growth
for a complete beginner is probably going
to be somewhere around half a pound per week,
and so there’s absolutely no realistic scenario
where you’re going to suddenly wake up one
day to realize that you’ve accidentally
“gone too far”, and instead, you’re
always going to see your muscle gains unfolding
from a mile away and you'll be easiy able
to modify your program as those gains come
depending on your preference.
So again, just focus on maximizing your overall
rate of progress by centering your workouts
around big basic compound exercises, by training
with a reasonably high level of overall volume
and intensity and frequency, sticking to a
moderate rep range and placing all of your
focus on achieving progressive overload over
time.
Question #3, what are your top recommendations
when it comes to pre-workout supplementation?
To be honest, I really don’t recommend a
whole lot here.
This is a category of supplements that’s
gotten completely out of control over the
past few years, and most trainees place way
too much value on them and spend way too much
money on them.
The majority of popular pre-workout products
that are available these days hide their ingredient
dosages behind a proprietary blend, and even
those that do list the specific amounts are
typically under-dosed anyway.
On top of that they usually contain way more
ingredients than is actually necessary a lot
of which aren’t even backed by good supportive
research, and they’re usually overpriced
as well.
The reality is that a very high percentage
of the benefits that you get from most pre-workout
products is just a result of the caffeine
content anyway, and so you can very easily
make your own perfectly effective homemade
pre-workout blend using a few simple ingredients
and for way less money.
My favorite “basic” pre-workout combination
is to just go with 100-200mg of caffeine anhydrous
paired up with 1-3 grams of l-tyrosine and
taken 30-45 minutes prior to training, and
if you do have a high tolerance for caffeine
you can increase that to 300mg.
The caffeine will increase your energy levels
and your mental focus as well as reduce muscular
fatigue, and the l-tyrosine will work downstream
from the caffeine to boost its effects further
without causing additional jitters.
If you do want a slightly more potent combination,
then you can also consider adding in 1-2 grams
of acetyl l-carnitine and/or 6-8 grams of
citrulline malate as well, however, this just
depends on your individual tolerance and preference
and how much money you want to spend on this
area of your supplement plan.
Question #4, what are the best carbohydrate
sources for muscle building or fat loss diets?
So proper carbohydrate selection really doesn’t
need to be anywhere near as complicated as
most people make it out to be, and there are
only a couple of basic “rules” that I
would recommend you follow.
So first off, just keep in mind that when
it all comes down to it, carbohydrates are
really just sugar.
So whether you consume a bowl of rice or an
apple or a chocolate bar, it all gets eventually
broken down into basic glucose one way or
another, and the only important factor to
pay attention to here is the fact that those
carbs are packaged up in different ways.
So some are found in high fiber, nutrient
dense food sources (so things like fruits
and vegetables) and others are found in foods
that might contain little or no fiber or real
nutritional value at all, so things like sugary
drinks or other typical “junk food”.
Now since consuming an adequate amount of
fiber and vitamins and minerals and other
phytonutrients is an important part of optimizing
your bodybuilding and fat loss results, your
main goal here should just be to get the bulk
of your overall carb intake (so I’d say
at least like 80%) from minimally processed,
higher fiber sources, so things like fruits,
vegetables, oatmeal, rice, potatoes, whole
grains etc.
After that, to just get some extra insurance
that your body’s micronutrient needs are
being fully met, aim to get in 2 servings
of vegetables and 1-2 servings of fruit per
day as part of that total, and then from there,
as long as at least 80% of your carbs are
coming from those types of foods, the rest
can be made up of whatever sources you’d
like as long as it fits into your daily totals.
And it’s really as simple as that.
As long as you’re following those 3 basic
guidelines then I’d say that that's really
all you need to worry about when it comes
to carb intake, and there's really no need
to analyze it any further.
And question #5, just how big of a role do
genetics play when it comes to building muscle?
So the simple and the honest answer hereis
that, as with most things in life, yes, genetics
do play a reasonably significant role in determining
how quickly or how slowly someone will gain
muscle.
Now there are many different factors that
are going to come into play here, including
muscle fiber type, testosterone levels, growth
hormone levels, metabolic rate, and recovery
ability just to name a few.
And on top of this, certain genetic factors
will also play a role in determining how your
actual physique will look once you’ve put
on a significant amount of muscle, so things
like muscular shape, your muscle insertion
points and your bone structure.
Now that said, there are two important things
that I would point out here.
First off, even though there are some people
out there with exceptionally “good” muscle
building genetics as well as people with particularly
“bad” muscle building genetics, the vast
majority of the population, so most of the
people watching this video, are still going
to fall somewhere in the middle.
So don’t let your perception be thrown off
by muscle magazines and by what you see online,
fitness model type bodies with six pack abs
all year round only represent a very, very
select minority of the population, like the
absolute upper percentile, and many of those
people aren’t even natural athletes to begin
with.
And secondly, no matter what your individual
genetic capacity for gaining muscle is, the
truth is that it really has no practical relevance
to your program anyway.
Unless you have some underlying health condition
that makes it very difficult for you to put
on muscle, virtually anyone can build a significant
amount of size and strength given enough time
and given enough consistency, and for some
people it just might take a shorter or longer
period of time than average.
So, the whole concept of “genetics and muscle
growth” is really just irrelevant, and your
only job is to train hard, eat right, stay
focused, stay consistent, and just make the
best of what you have.
So that’s all for today, thanks for watching
this video lesson, I hope you found this Q&A
useful here today.
If you want to learn everything you need to
know to structure a complete muscle building
or fat burning plan that maximizes your results,
along with concrete step by step training,
nutrition and supplementation plans that you
can follow, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.