One of the more popular gym goals folks have
is to increase their arm size.
Training the biceps is undoubtedly an important
component of this.
However, it should be noted the triceps are
roughly 2.5 times larger than the biceps.
Therefore, triceps training should not be
underestimated when it comes to increasing
arm size.
The triceps consist of three muscles: the
long head, lateral head, and medial head.
In some individuals, a fourth head has been
observed.
However, given it's considered rare and I'm
unaware of research about this head relating
to muscle growth, we'll ignore it.
Both the medial and lateral head originates
from the back of the humerus.
The humerus refers to the upper arm bone.
The precise location for the lateral head
is just above an area called the radial groove,
while the location for the medial head is
just below the radial groove.
Conversely, the long head originates from
the scapula.
The scapula refers to the shoulder blades.
The precise location is at an area called
the infraglenoid tubercle.
All three muscles insert into around the same
location, the ulna.
The ulna is one of the forearm bones.
The precise location is at an area called
the olecranon process.
Two studies indicate the long head is the
largest muscle of the triceps.
With regards to the lateral and medial head,
one of the studies indicates the lateral head
is larger than the medial head, whereas the
other study indicates the opposite of this.
Of course, individual differences likely exist.
The size of the medial and lateral head may
be more individualized.
As all three heads cross the elbow joint,
they all play a role during elbow movement.
Specifically, all three heads actively extend
the elbow.
Also, remember, the long head originates at
the scapula and therefore crosses the shoulder
joint.
Therefore, as it crosses the shoulder and
elbow joints, it is called a two-joint muscle.
Contrastingly, the medial and lateral
head, which only cross the elbow joint.
Resulting in them being only one-joint muscles.
As the long head crosses the shoulder joint,
it also appears to play an active role in
shoulder extension and shoulder adduction.
That said, evidence indicates the long head's
contribution to shoulder extension is small.
The same thing may also apply to shoulder
adduction.
Therefore, exercises involving
only shoulder extension or shoulder adduction
probably do not substantially stimulate the
long head.
Moving on, combining the results from a few
papers, the triceps overall appears to be
comprised of more fast-twitch muscle fibers
than slow-twitch fibers.
Slow-twitch fibers are highly resistant to
fatigue but produce low amounts of power,
while fast-twitch fibers produce are less
resistant to fatigue but produce high amounts
of power.
As the triceps appears to be made up of more
fast-twitch fibers, I've come across recommendations
that you should use low reps and heavy weight
to optimize triceps hypertrophy.
However, the current evidence would not support
this recommendation.
Schoenfeld et al. split 18 men with an average
of 3 and a half years of training experience
into a low load or high load group.
Both groups trained the same 7 exercises for
3 sets with 90 seconds of rest between sets,
three times per week for 8 weeks.
In this study, the bench press and overhead
press were the two exercises that trained
the triceps.
The high load group trained each exercise
with a load that allowed them to perform 8-12
reps to failure (the point at which no more
repetitions can be performed) each set.
The low load group trained each exercise with
a load that allowed them to perform 25-35
reps to failure each set.
Thickness of the triceps, measured at 60%
of the upper arm length, was similar between
the high load and light load group.
Some of you may be thinking that using an
8-12 rep load isn't heavy enough.
Fortunately, there is another paper by Schoenfeld
et al. looking at heavier loads.
19 men with an average of 4 and a half years
of experience were split into a heavy or moderate
group.
Both groups trained the same 7 exercises for
3 sets each with 2 minutes of rest between
sets, 3 times per week for 8 weeks.
Like the last study, the bench press and overhead
press were the two exercises that trained
the triceps.
The heavy group used a load that allowed them
to perform 2 to 4 to failure each set.
The moderate group used a load that allowed
them to perform 8-12 reps to failure each
set.
Increases in triceps thickness, measured at
60% of the upper arm length, seemed to slightly
favor the moderate group.
Therefore, 8-12 rep loads may be slightly
better for triceps hypertrophy than 2-4 rep
loads.
As a side note, the overall research seems
to indicate reps between 5 and 35 produce
similar hypertrophy, provided those reps are
performed to or very close to failure.
This very likely applies to the triceps
Now, the fiber type numbers shown just a moment
ago combined results from numerous studies
looking at different heads or regions of the
triceps.
I was able to find one human study by Elder
et al. assessing the fiber type composition
of each triceps head.
Both the lateral and long heads appear to
be more fast-twitch than slow-twitch.
However, the medial head appears to be more
slow-twitch than fast-twitch.
Of course, this is only one study.
Moreover, fiber type composition does vary
between individuals.
Nevertheless, if the medial head is on average
more slow-twitch than fast-twitch, this might
suggest the medial head may be slightly harder
to grow than the long and lateral heads.
This is because fast-twitch muscle fibers
seem to have a greater capacity for hypertrophy
than slow-twitch fibers.
Interestingly, Wakahara et al. did find that
after training the dumbbell triceps skull
crusher for 12 weeks, increases in triceps
cross-sectional area were fairly minimal at
the lower regions.
The lower regions primarily consisted of the
medial head.
The authors speculated the minimal hypertrophy
in this distal region was because the medial
head is comprised of fewer fast-twitch fibers.
Let us now evaluate if the research provides
us with details on the role of each triceps
head during elbow extension, as well as elbow
extension actions at various shoulder angles.
Remember, the long head crosses the shoulder
joint.
Therefore, it's reasonable to assume that
manipulating shoulder angle may change the
contribution of each triceps head to elbow
extension.
During elbow extension, all the way back in
1867, a researcher by the name of Duchenne
suggested the medial and lateral head produce
similar force, while the long head contributed
less.
Since then, as you'd imagine, a lot more research
has been published on the role of each triceps
head during elbow extension.
Unfortunately, the research is completely
conflicting.
Some papers agree with Duchenne, while others
completely conflict.
Moreover, a few papers also indicate all three
heads produce the same relative force during
elbow extension.
So, unfortunately, the research is far from
clear on the contribution of each triceps
head to elbow extension.
As for the impact of shoulder angle on the
contribution of each triceps head to elbow
extension, a study by Kholinne et al. examined
this.
They found when performing elbow extension
at 0 degrees of shoulder flexion, the medial
and lateral head produce equal but less force
than the long head.
During elbow extension at 90 degrees of shoulder
flexion, the lateral and long head produced
equal but less force than the medial head.
During elbow extension at 180 degrees of shoulder
flexion, the medial head produced more force
than the lateral head.
The lateral head also produced more force
than the long head.
However, a study by Davidson et al. found
that the three triceps heads were all similarly
relatively activated during elbow extension
at 0 degrees and 180 degrees of shoulder flexion.
In total, the research, unfortunately, cannot
provide us with strong evidence about the
role of each triceps head during elbow extension,
as well as during elbow extension at various
shoulder angles.
Now, there is evidence different individuals
display different activation and activation
patterns of the triceps during the same tasks.
These individual differences, to some degree,
may explain the overall conflicting evidence.
Other factors such as differences in equipment
and methodology may also go some way to explaining
the discrepancies.
Nonetheless, despite the research being unable
to inform us of the contribution of each triceps
head to various movements, there is other
research, mainly long-term research, that
can provide us with solid information on how
we may maximize triceps hypertrophy.
Firstly, how effective are compound exercises
for triceps development?
Compound exercises involve motion at two joints
or more, resulting in multiple muscles being
trained.
Generally, there are two types of compound
exercises that target the triceps: horizontal
presses and vertical presses.
Horizontal presses include exercises like
the bench press, push-ups, and a machine chest
press.
Vertical presses include exercises like the
overhead press, handstand push-ups, and machine
shoulder press.
Exploring horizontal presses first, an interesting
study by Brandao et al. assessed how effective
the bench press is at inducing triceps hypertrophy.
A group of untrained men trained the barbell
bench press with a 2x-shoulder-width grip.
They performed 3 to 5 sets to failure with
an 80% one-rep max load and 3 minutes of rest
between sets, twice per week for 10 weeks.
They experienced pretty good growth of the
lateral head, fairly decent growth of the
medial head, but very little growth of the
long head.
By the way, for all three muscles, cross-sectional
area measurements were taken at 50-60% of
the upper arm length.
Therefore, it appears horizontal presses,
like the bench press, maybe particularly poor
at developing the long head.
Adding further support to this, Wakahara et
al. found that during a dumbbell bench press
performed with a neutral hand position, activation
of the long head, measured by T2 weighted
imaging, was less than that of the medial
and lateral heads.
Biomechanically, the finding that the long
head is poorly trained with horizontal presses
makes sense.
Remember, as the long head crosses the shoulder
joint, it is actively involved in shoulder
extension.
During the lowering phase of horizontal pressing
exercises, where shoulder extension occurs,
the long head shortens.
As a result, it cannot actively contract and
contribute to force production in the lifting
phase of the movement.
As for vertical presses, I was unfortunately
unable to find any long-term studies or reliable
activation studies exploring the impact of
vertical presses on the triceps.
That said, as there isn't really any shoulder
extension during the lowering phase of the
movement, the long head is probably going
to be involved in the elbow extension that
occurs during vertical presses.
Furthermore, I can't think of any reason as
to why the lateral and medial head would not
be involved to a good degree too.
However, I do not say this with 100% confidence
simply due to the absence of research.
Nevertheless, overall, although compound exercises
are likely going to produce meaningful triceps
hypertrophy, I believe the evidence would
appear to suggest that to maximize and accelerate
triceps hypertrophy, the inclusion of isolation
exercises would be necessary.
Isolation exercises involve motion at one
joint, resulting in one muscle group being
primarily trained.
One of the reasons I believe isolation exercises
may be necessary is because evidence indicates
that within a muscle, there may be subpopulations
of muscle fibers that have different functional
roles.
Put differently, there could be different
regions and groups of muscle fibers in the
triceps that are activated more or less during
different movements.
For instance, an extremely interesting study
by Zuylen et al. identified 3 different subpopulations
of muscle fibers within the triceps.
One subpopulation of fibers was activated
during elbow extension, supination, or pronation
of the hand, another subpopulation activated
during elbow extension or supination of the
hand, not pronation, while the last subpopulation
activated during elbow extension only.
Now, this study only looked at the activation
of a few groups of muscle fibers from all
three heads during elbow extension, supination,
or pronation of the hand, as well as various
combinations of these movements.
Extrapolating from this study, I think it's
quite possible that within the triceps, there
exist different subpopulations of muscle fibers
that may be more or less activated during
elbow extension at varying shoulder angles.
If true, this would indicate that performing
triceps exercises with different shoulder
angles could be beneficial for stimulating
these subpopulations of fibers and therefore
ensuring more balanced hypertrophy across
the triceps.
Furthermore, I think it's possible that during
different stages of elbow extension, there
also exist different subpopulations of muscle
fibers that may be more or less activated.
If true, this would suggest using different
triceps exercises that require maximal force
production at different stages of elbow extension
could be beneficial for stimulating these
subpopulations of fibers and therefore ensuring
more balanced hypertrophy across the triceps.
As an example, triceps pushdowns are most
challenging closer to elbow lockout, where
the triceps are close to being fully shortened.
Conversely, triceps skullcrushers appear
to be most challenging when the triceps are
more stretched.
Therefore, these two exercises may stimulate
different regions of the triceps more so than others,
making them complimentary in a training program.
If you were to only train your triceps with
compound exercises, I think it's highly likely
you would be understimulating some subpopulation
of muscle fibers.
For that reason, performing a few isolation
triceps exercises on top of your compound
exercises would probably be ultimately better
for ensuring greater overall triceps development.
Furthermore, using a few different isolation
exercises, rather than only one isolation
exercise, is probably favorable.
A recent study by Costa et al. demonstrates
these concepts nicely.
22 detrained men, who had not trained in the
6 months before the study, were allocated
into a non-varied or varied group.
We'll only be focusing on the exercises and
measurements done on the triceps, they did
assess other muscles, I'll leave the link
to the study in the description.
Also, I do plan to cover other areas of this
study in future videos.
Both groups trained 3 times per week for 8
weeks.
All exercises were trained with 3 sets of
8-12 reps with 90-120 seconds of rest between
sets.
The non-varied group, each session, performed
the barbell bench press and triceps extension.
The varied group, on day 1 of each week, also
performed the barbell bench press and triceps
extension.
But on day 2, they performed the incline bench
press and cable seated triceps extension,
and on day 3, the decline bench press and
triceps kickback pulley.
Thickness of the overall triceps was measured
at 50%, 60%, and 70% of the upper arm length.
Increases at all regions, particularly the
60% and 70% regions, appear to favor the varied
group.
Therefore, this study would seem to suggest
that a variety of exercises, including a variety
of triceps isolation exercises, enhances overall
triceps development.
There does exist some additional research
regarding triceps isolation exercises that
may be helpful.
Returning to the Brandao et al. study earlier,
they also had a group of untrained men perform
triceps skull crushers for 3 to 5 sets to
failure with an 80% one-rep max load and 3
minutes of rest between sets, twice per week
for 10 weeks.
Significant increases in cross-sectional area
for the medial and long head were experienced.
But interestingly, there was hardly any growth
of the lateral head.
For all these muscles, cross-sectional area
was measured at 50 to 60% of the upper arm
length.
Another study by Wakahara et al. supports
these results.
They found during dumbbell tricep skull crushers,
activation of the lateral head, measured by
T2 weighted imaging, was lower than medial
and long head activation.
Unfortunately, I was unable to find any reliable
evidence explaining why the lateral head may
not be stimulated during triceps skull crushers.
Anyway, remember earlier we mentioned the
Brandao et al. study demonstrates the barbell
bench press produces pretty good lateral head
growth.
Something I haven't mentioned yet is the Brandao
et al. study also had two other groups that
trained both the barbell bench press and triceps
skullcrushers.
One of these groups, in each session, performed
the barbell bench press first followed by
the triceps skullcrushers.
Whereas the other group, in each session,
performed the triceps skull crusher first
followed by the barbell bench press.
As a note, both groups trained each exercise
for 3 to 5 sets to failure with an 80% one-rep
max load and 3 minutes of rest between sets,
twice per week for 10 weeks.
Both groups experienced significant cross-sectional
increases for all three heads.
This study nicely demonstrates how the addition
of isolation exercises can be beneficial for
overall triceps development.
However, all measurements were only taken
at 50-60% of the upper arm length.
As discussed and demonstrated by the Costa
et al. study, it's likely a good idea to perform
a variety of triceps isolation exercises to
ensure more balanced growth across the triceps.
The final study I came across exploring triceps
isolation exercises compared cable overhead
extensions to cable pushdowns for long head
hypertrophy.
9 untrained women had one arm assigned to
train cable overhead extensions and their
other arm assigned to train cable pushdowns.
The cable pushdowns started with the elbow
at 90째 and ended at 170째.
The cable overhead extensions started at 30째
and ended at 110째 of the elbow.
They trained each exercise for 6 sets of 6
reps to failure with 2 minutes of rest between
sets, twice per week for 6 weeks.
Increases in long head thickness, measured
at 50% and 60% of the upper arm length, were
statistically similar between both conditions.
However, the results appear to do seem to
favor the arm that trained with cable overhead
extensions.
There were only 9 subjects.
Overhead extensions could produce more long
head growth, but this study was just underpowered.
But at this same time, the percentages supporting
the overhead extensions could simply be a
result of random variation.
If the long head is best trained with overhead
elbow extension exercises, this would indeed
match conventional bodybuilding wisdom.
However, I think more research would be needed
to confirm this.
Wrapping up the conversation on exercise selection,
as a general rule of thumb, performing 2-3
isolation tricep exercises (like what was
used in the Costa et al. study) in addition
to your compound exercises is probably a sensible
way to ensure sufficient overall triceps development.
As discussed, performing exercises that involve
elbow extension at varying shoulder angles
could be beneficial.
For instance, you may include an overhead
extension, triceps skull crusher, and press
down in your program.
Performing a variety of exercises will typically
result in you having a variety of triceps
exercises that involve maximal forces at different
degrees of elbow extension.
As we mentioned earlier, this is may be beneficial,
as exercises that involve maximal forces at
different stages of elbow extension could
target some regions of the triceps
more than others.
Moving on, should you be training the triceps
with higher or lower volumes?
Volume here refers to the number of weekly
sets you perform for the triceps.
Also, in the following research, each set
had subjects perform their repetitions to
or very close to failure.
With the research on volume, it's important
to distinguish between studies that used short
or long rest intervals between sets.
This is because as discussed in our complete
guide to rest intervals, the research indicates
with the same number of sets performed, longer
rest intervals (around 2.5-3 minutes) produces
greater hypertrophy than shorter durations,
at least with compound exercises.
However, it seems that performing more sets
with shorter rest intervals can produce similar
hypertrophy to fewer sets with longer rest
intervals.
Therefore, it makes to analyze studies that
used shorter rest intervals and longer rest
intervals separately.
Overall, when using shorter rest intervals,
more weekly sets for the triceps appear to
be better.
Schoenfeld et al. found that when trained
subjects used 90 seconds of rest between sets,
performing 30 weekly sets for the triceps
was superior to performing 18 weekly sets
and 6 weekly sets.
I should mention all of these sets were from
compound exercises only, half of the sets
for each group were from the bench press and
the other half from the overhead press.
Also, each group distributed their sets across
3 days each week and training lasted 8 weeks.
Brigatto et al. similarly found that when
trained subjects used 60 seconds of rest between
sets, performing 32 weekly sets for the triceps
was superior to 24 weekly sets or 16 weekly
sets.
For each group, half of their sets were from
compound exercises while the other half were
from isolation exercises.
Each group distributed their sets across 2
days each week and training lasted 8 weeks.
Lastly, Radaelli et al. found that when subjects
with previous calisthenics experience used
90-120 seconds of rest between sets, performing
45 weekly sets for the triceps was superior
to 27 weekly sets or 9 weekly sets.
For each group 2/3 of their sets were from
compound exercises, while 1/3 were from isolation
exercises.
Each group distributed their sets across 3
days each week and training lasted 6 months.
So overall, when using shorter rest intervals,
between 30-45 weekly sets for the triceps
appears to be superior to fewer sets.
Now, 30-45 weekly sets with short rest intervals
is a substantial amount of work.
I question how sustainable this kind of work
can be in the long term.
The Schoenfeld and Brigatto studies only lasted
8 weeks, but the Radaelli study did last 6
months.
I think it'd be useful to see more studies
like the Radaelli study to determine if this
kind of work is truly sustainable long term.
Nevertheless, the best advice I can give is
that if you prefer to use shorter rest intervals,
try out this kind of volume and figure out
how well it may work for you.
If you feel your recovery and performance
begin to decline, adding in occasional training
blocks where you utilize lower weekly sets
for recovery may be a useful strategy.
Another important consideration is all of
these studies were conducted on trained individuals.
The Schoenfeld and Brigatto studies had subjects
with at least 1 year of training experience,
while the Radaelli study had subjects with
previous calisthenics training experience,
though they did not state the duration of
their experience.
Trained individuals experience blunted anabolic
responses to training, less muscle damage,
and faster recovery of performance.
This all indicates trained individuals would
benefit from higher weekly sets versus untrained
individuals.
Therefore, I think it's highly likely untrained
individuals would experience sufficient triceps
growth using fewer than 30-45 weekly sets
with shorter rest intervals.
Perhaps 15-20 may be sufficient.
Hopefully future research can confirm this.
Moving on to longer rest intervals, Ostrowski
et al. found that when trained subjects rested
for 3 minutes between sets, there was no difference
between performing 14 weekly sets for the
triceps or 28 weekly sets, but both were more
effective than performing 7 weekly sets.
For each group, half of their sets came from
compound exercises while the other half were
from isolation exercises.
Also, each group distributed their sets over
2 days each week and training lasted 10 weeks.
Therefore, it seems with longer rest intervals,
14 weekly sets for the triceps may be sufficient,
performing more seems to provide no further
benefit.
However, there is a potential limitation with
this study.
Subjects distributed their weekly sets across
2 days a week.
The 28 weekly set group were performing 16
sets in one session and 12 sets in their second
session each week.
This is quite a bit of volume in each training
session.
Theoretically, there may be a limit to the
number of effective sets you can perform per
session.
Two of the short rest interval studies we
assessed a moment ago, finding more hypertrophy
with more sets, had subjects distribute their
volume across 3 days each week.
Therefore, with the Ostrowski study, the 28
weekly set group could have experienced more
hypertrophy if subjects trained three or more
days each week.
But this is speculative.
As far as I'm aware, this is the only paper
to have assessed the impacts of weekly sets
on triceps hypertrophy with longer rest intervals.
Now, the research using short rest intervals
indicates up to 30-45 weekly sets for the
triceps is superior.
When using longer rest intervals, it would
make sense that fewer weekly sets should be
sufficient for hypertrophy.
As mentioned, with the same number of sets,
longer rest intervals produce more hypertrophy.
So in essence, using longer rest intervals
makes each set more effective.
As a result, generally, I think performing
anywhere from 14 to 28 weekly sets may be
fine if you're using long rest intervals.
For people with numerous years of training
experience, weekly sets on the higher end
may be beneficial.
Untrained individuals would probably experience
a sufficient stimulus towards the lower end.
As some of you probably noticed, in all of
the mentioned studies, we treated compound
exercises and isolation exercises equally.
That is, one set on the bench press was counted
as one set for the triceps, and one set of
an isolation tricep exercise was also counted
as one set for the triceps.
However, some individuals consider one set
of compound exercises, like the bench press,
to only contribute to maybe 0.5 sets for the
triceps.
This assumes that compound exercises are slightly
less stimulatory than isolation exercises
for certain muscles.
But, as we detailed in the exercise selection
portion of the video, if you combine a few
triceps isolation exercises with your compound
exercises, as is recommended, all of your
exercises are not going to be identical stimuli
for the triceps.
In essence, each exercise, regardless of if
it's compound or isolation, serves a slightly
different purpose for overall triceps hypertrophy.
Therefore, much of your weekly sets for the
triceps are not identical stimuli.
Given this, I think it's much simpler to just
accept this but continue to count each set
of an exercise that trains the triceps, regardless
of whether it's compound or isolation, as
one set.
As they did in the research we assessed.
Now, let us explore if you should be training
your triceps with a low frequency or high
frequency.
In this case, frequency refers to the number
of days per week you train your triceps.
In other words, it tells us how many days
a week you distribute your weekly triceps
sets across.
Interestingly, there is some evidence suggesting
the triceps may take longer to recover than
other muscle groups.
Indeed, I have seen some individuals recommend
that the triceps be trained less frequently
due to this evidence.
However, the details are important.
The evidence I'm referring to is a study by
Chen et al.
They had 9 untrained men perform a training
session in which they trained a variety of
muscle groups, including the triceps, with
a variety of eccentric contractions.
The triceps exercise is on screen.
For each exercise, they performed 5 sets of
10 eccentric reps.
Meaning they only performed the lowering phase
of each exercise, not the concentric lifting
phase.
Eccentric contractions are more damaging and
require longer recovery durations than concentric
contractions.
So overall, this training session was pretty
taxing.
The maximal force they could produce with
each muscle group and the degree of muscle
soreness was measured 2 days before the training
session, immediately before the session, immediately
after the session, and 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 days
after the session.
The triceps experienced greater decreases
in force production and more soreness compared
to quite a few other muscle groups.
Therefore, this study indicates that when
you first begin training, the triceps may
take longer to recover compared to many other
muscle groups.
Despite this, it's very important to understand
the body does produce a range of adaptations
following training sessions that result in
you experiencing less muscle damage and faster
recovery.
In the research, this is called the repeated
bout effect.
The Chen et al. study, 2 weeks after the initial
training session, had the subjects perform
the exact same training protocol again.
This time around, all muscle groups experienced
less decrease in force production and muscle
soreness in the following days after the session.
Now, the triceps still experienced greater
force loss and soreness compared to some other
muscle groups.
But, it's very likely that if you train the
triceps consistently for a few weeks, the
body will produce a range of adaptations that
significantly speed up the recovery process.
A study by Akgai et al. demonstrates this.
They assigned 23 untrained men into a training
or control group.
The control group did nothing.
The training group trained dumbbell triceps
skull crushers for 5 sets of 8 reps with an
80% one-rep max load with 90 seconds of rest
between sets, 3 times per week for 6 weeks.
Before and after the study, the shear modulus
of the triceps was measured for both groups.
Shear modulus measures the hardness of a muscle.
In essence, the harder the muscle, the more
muscle damage probably present.
After the study, there was no difference between
the training group and the control group in
the shear modulus of the triceps.
Moreover, there was no difference in shear
modulus between the before and after measurements
for both groups.
Therefore, it seems the training group was
not experiencing any damage to the triceps
by week 6.
The same research group had previously found
that one day after performing triceps skull
crushers there was an increase in the shear
modulus of the triceps, suggesting muscle
damage.
All this information nicely demonstrates the
repeated bout effect.
Although initially, the triceps may take longer
to recover compared to other muscle groups,
over time, thanks to the adaptations produced
by the body, this would not matter.
The triceps will likely have the ability to
recover significantly faster.
This same information very likely applies
to any other muscle group too.
I say all this to say that the triceps can
likely ultimately be trained with higher frequencies
without recovery being an issue.
Having that said, let us now actually evaluate
the long-term research exploring the triceps
response to lower and higher frequencies.
Brigatto et al. found that in men with an
average of 4 and a half years of training
experience performing 16 weekly sets for the
triceps, there was no difference in triceps
growth between training once per week or twice
per week.
As a note, half of their weekly sets were
from compound exercises, and the other half
from isolation exercises.
They rested 2 minutes between sets.
Somewhat similarly, Saric et al. found in
men with at least 6 months of training experience
performing 12 weekly sets for the triceps,
there was no difference in triceps growth
between training three times per week or 6
times per week.
All 12 sets were from isolation exercises.
They rested 60-90 seconds between sets.
Collectively, these two studies suggest that
the number of times you train the triceps
per week is irrelevant for hypertrophy.
However, there are studies that oppose this.
Lasevicius et al. found in men with an average
of 3 years of training experience performing
24 weekly sets for the triceps, triceps growth
favored training twice per week versus three
times per week.
Half of their weekly sets were from compound
exercises and the other half from isolation
exercises.
They rested 90 seconds between sets.
Contrastingly, Schoenfeld et al. found that
when men with an average of 4 and a half years
of training experience performed 15 weekly
sets for the triceps, training three times
per week was superior to training twice per
week.
9 weekly sets from compound exercises and
the remaining 6 from isolation exercises.
They used 60-90 second rest intervals between
sets.
Another study by Zaroni et al. found that
in men with an average of 6 and a half years
of training experience performing 30 weekly
sets for the triceps, distributing this volume
over 5 days a week was superior to training
twice per week.
Half of their weekly sets were from compound
exercises and the other half from isolation
exercises.
They rested 60 seconds between sets.
Combining the overall evidence, it's completely
unclear what training frequency may be optimal
for triceps growth.
Ultimately, more research is needed here.
Also, all of these studies used short rest
intervals.
I'm not aware of any research using long rest
intervals that evaluated the impacts of different
training frequencies on triceps growth.
Now, part of conflicting evidence may just
be down to individual differences.
Training variables like training frequency
as well as volume may be quite individualized.
That is to say, different individuals may
respond best to different training frequencies
and volumes.
A paper by Damas et al. nicely demonstrates
this.
They had 19 untrained men train one of their
legs with a high frequency and volume protocol
and their other leg with a low frequency and
volume protocol.
The high frequency and volume leg trained
the unilateral leg extension for 3 sets of
9-12 to failure 5 times per week.
The low frequency and volume leg also trained
the unilateral leg extension for 3 sets of
9-12 to failure each session, but they trained
two or three times per week.
As each subject trained both protocols, one
leg performed one protocol and their other
leg the other protocol, we can determine whether
an individual is more responsive to a particular
protocol.
For increases in vastus lateralis cross-sectional
area increases, 6 subjects experienced the
greatest increases with the high frequency
and volume protocol, 7 subjects experienced
the greatest increases with the low frequency
and volume protocol, while the remaining 6
subjects responded similarly to both protocols.
As we can see, different individuals may respond
better to different frequencies and volumes.
Therefore, in the long term, you may wish
to experiment with various training frequencies
or volumes and figure out if there is any
discernable difference between them for you.
The last section of this video that I thought
would be an interesting addition is whether
aiming to induce hypoxia with your triceps
exercises could enhance triceps hypertrophy.
In our scenario, hypoxia refers to using some
method of depriving the muscle of oxygen.
If this makes little sense to you, don't worry,
it will make more sense to you as we look
at the research.
A study by Goto et al. was the paper that
inspired me to add this section.
44 men with at least 1 year of training experience
were assigned to a partial range of motion
or full range of motion group.
Both groups trained the triceps skull crusher
for 3 sets of 8 reps, three times per week
for 8 weeks.
The full range of motion group began with
their elbows in full extension, lowering the
weight to their maximal elbow flexion angle
and then extending back to full extension.
The partial range of motion group began with
their elbows flexed to 45 degrees, lowering
the weight to 90 degrees of elbow flexion,
and then extending back to 45 degrees of elbow
flexion.
This technique would have induced significantly
more hypoxia than the full range of motion
group, as the constant contractions would
likely compress capillaries resulting in restricted
blood flow to the triceps.
Increases in triceps cross-sectional area,
measured at 60% of the upper arm length, was
significantly greater for the partial range
of motion group.
For the partial range of motion group, the
researchers also measured the degree of hypoxia
experienced by the subjects after performing
the partial range of motion skull crushers.
Something extremely interesting was that the
researchers found a correlation between the
degree of hypoxia experienced by subjects
and their increase in triceps cross-sectional
area.
Put differently, the subjects in the partial
range of motion group that experienced the
highest degree of hypoxia also experienced
the greatest increases in triceps cross-sectional
area.
Another study by Fink et al. also somewhat
agrees with this study.
16 untrained men were split into a drop set
or normal set group.
Both groups trained the triceps pushdown,
twice per week for 8 weeks.
The normal set group performed three sets
to failure with a 12 rep-max load and 90 seconds
of rest between sets.
The drop set group performed a single set
to failure with a 12 rep-max load, immediately
decreasing the load by 20% each time failure
was reached 3 times in a row.
Due to the numerous continuous contractions,
it's likely the drop set group would have
been experiencing greater hypoxia than the
normal set group.
Increases in triceps cross-sectional area,
measured at 60% of the upper arm length, favor
the drop set group.
At the time of recording, I believe this is
the only study finding drop set training produces
greater hypertrophy than normal sets.
All of the other studies, which were conducted
on either the biceps or quadriceps, found
no difference between the two.
This raises an interesting question: could
there be something special about the triceps
that makes them more responsive to hypoxia?
Unfortunately, I'm unaware of any evidence
that can support this claim.
Additionally, there are other lines of evidence
that indicate hypoxia does not augment triceps
growth.
Tanimoto et al. had subjects train 8 weeks
with either the normal chest press or the
chest press without locking out their elbows,
which likely would have produced greater triceps
hypoxia than normal chest press reps.
However, both exercises produced similar increases
in triceps thickness.
Furthermore, two papers indicate adding blood
flow restriction bands to the upper arms during
the bench press, which would likely produce
greater hypoxia than non-blood flow restriction
training, produced similar increases in triceps
cross-sectional area compared to normal bench
press training without blood flow restriction.
So overall, it's not clear if partial range
of motion skull crushers or drop set training
formats truly produce greater triceps hypertrophy.
More research is needed.
Although, I don't see any real downside to
including some drop set training or partial
range of motion constant tension training
for the triceps.
So I think it may be perfectly fine to do
so.
We've gone through a lot of information and
research on how one could go about maximizing
triceps hypertrophy, let us summarize the
key points.
1) Performing 2-3 triceps isolation exercises
on top of your compound exercises should not
only ensure each triceps head is trained sufficiently
but different regions within each triceps
head are also sufficiently targeted.
2) As for rep ranges, the research suggests
that provided you perform your repetitions
to or very close to failure, reps between
5 and 35 should produce similar triceps hypertrophy.
3) With regards to volume, if you use shorter
rests between sets (around 2 minutes less),
30-45 weekly sets seem to produce greater
triceps growth than fewer sets.
But I question how sustainable this kind of
work can be long term, maybe adding in training
blocks with lower weekly sets may be necessary
here.
Now, this recommendation is derived from research
on trained individuals, untrained individuals
can likely achieve sufficient adaptations
with fewer weekly sets.
If you use longer rest rests between sets
(3 minutes or more), there isn't a good deal
of research.
As a broad recommendation, anywhere from 14
to 28 weekly sets may work well.
Untrained individuals may experience optimal
adaptations on the lower end, whereas more
trained individuals may benefit from the higher
end.
4) Regarding training frequency, the research
is completely conflicting.
Some studies indicate no difference between
various frequencies, others suggest a benefit
to higher frequencies and even one indicates
a benefit to lower frequencies.
In part, individual differences could explain
the conflicting evidence.
Some individuals may respond best to certain
frequencies.
So you may wish to individually experiment
or simply chose a frequency that fits your
schedule.
Bear in mind, individual differences apply
to the discussion on volume as well.
So you may wish to individually experiment
with lower or higher volumes or simply go
with whatever fits your schedule.
5) Finally, you could perform one of your
isolation triceps exercises with a constant
tension technique, or with drop sets, as some
evidence indicates this enhances triceps hypertrophy.
Though there is research somewhat opposing
this, so it's perfectly fine to not do this.