Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and today
I want to answer a very common question that
people ask me all the time which is why am
I getting stronger but not bigger.
Yes, it’s perfectly possible for you to
make noteworthy gains in strength without
any real size gains to go along with it.
See, in simple terms, your body can basically
produce strength gains in two primary ways.
The first is through muscular hypertrophy,
or growth and this refers to an actual increase
in the cross-sectional area of the muscle
itself.
And if you’re trying to pack on muscle size,
this is obviously the type of gain that you’re
after.
And the second is through neural adaptations.
And in this case, your body is basically becoming
more efficient at recruiting motor units and
making use of the muscle mass that you already
have.
If you’ve been gaining strength without
the size to go along with it then this is
the primary adaptation that you’ve been
experiencing.
While it’s possible that this is happening
as a result of an improperly structured workout
plan, it’s not very likely that this is
the case.
If you’re already in the gym and you're
making consistent strength gains over time
then you'd have to be making some pretty basic
fundamental errors in your training structure
in order for your workout plan to be the root
of the problem.
So here are a few possible, but unlikely scenarios.
Number 1, you’re mostly performing sets
of 3 reps or less.
This would primarily result in gains in strength
and power rather than actual hypertrophy.
Secondly, you’re performing sets primarily
of, in excess of 12 reps.
And this is going to primarily result in increases
in endurance again rather than hypertrophy.
Another possibility, you’re only performing
a couple sets per muscle group per workout.
This is going to prevent you from creating
enough metabolic fatigue in the muscle in
order to produce significant size gains.
Another possibility, you’re training each
muscle group less than once every 10 days
or so.
You could still produce size gains in this
way, but it would be a much more gradual process.
And finally you're training or rather you're
not training all of your muscle groups equally.
If all you’re doing is going into the gym
to train your “showy” muscles like your
chest or your biceps, or your abs then the
overall changes to your physique are going
to be far less noticeable and take a much
longer period of time.
So if you’re making any of those basic errors,
you're going to want to fix those immediately.
You're going to want to make sure that you’re
sticking to a hypertrophy-based rep range
anywhere between 5 and 12.
You're going to want to make sure that you're
hitting each muscle group at least once per
week, that you’re performing multiple sets
per muscle group during each session and that
you’re training your entire body with equal
focus and intensity.
However, assuming that you already have these
basic training principles in place, which
I'm sure most of you do, then your lack of
size gains likely has nothing to do with your
actual training plan at all.
Yes, your current plan could probably be tweaked
and improved further but if you’re employing
all of those principles that I just mentioned
and you’re making consistent gains in strength
as well, then your workout plan is already
structured at least well enough to produce
noticeable gains in muscle size.
So, what's the real problem here?
Well, it's pretty simple and it’s your diet.
More specifically, you’re not consuming
an adequate calorie intake each day.
Remember, in order for you to build a significant
amount of muscle, you have to provide your
body with a calorie surplus each day by consistently
consuming more calories than you're burning.
Now this is known as the “law of energy
balance”, and without this in place, your
gains are basically going to be non-existent.
So if you’re gaining strength without the
size then the chances are that you’re consuming
a level of calories each day that is either
right at or right around your calorie maintenance
level.
You’re taking in enough for your body to
maintain its current weight, but you're not
providing that additional excess that is needed
in order to fuel new hypertrophy gains.
It’s possible that you’re already aware
of this, but if you’re simply “winging”
your diet each day without tracking anything
then there’s a very good chance that you're
still going to end up missing the mark.
So what's the basic solution here?
Well, you need to find out what your calorie
maintenance level is, increase it by about
15 to 20 percent and then track your intake
each day in order to make sure that you're
falling within the proper range.
For the very best results you should ideally
be tracking your individual macronutrient
intake as well, so your proteins, your carbs
and your fats, but at the very least you’re
going to want to make sure that your calorie
intake is nailed down.
Total calorie intake is the primary, underlying
foundation of your entire nutrition plan and
if this basic principle is not being employed
then you’re completely wasting your time
at the gym.
So, how do you go about calculating this?
Well, the easiest option is to just head over
to SeanNal.com and access my Free Bodybuilding
Macronutrient Calculator, which I'll link
in the description box below.
This is going to completely automate the process
for you and it just requires you to punch
in a few basic stats about yourself.
Not only does the calculator outline your
daily calorie needs, but it's also going to
cover your protein, carb and fat needs as
well.
Or, if for some reason you want to calculate
this all manually then you can check out an
article that I wrote previously called “How
Many Calories Per Day To Build Muscle" which
I'll also link in the description box as well.
This one simple shift in your bodybuilding
program is immediately going to take you from
a place of complete stagnation to consistently
gaining brand new muscle size every single
week.
So thanks alot for watching this video lesson.
I appreciate all the support.
If you found the information useful here today
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date
on future video lessons.
Also make sure to check out my complete fully
structured step-by-step muscle building and
fat loss programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below and make sure to join the Facebook page
for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.