Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I want to quickly answer
a question that I’m actually surprised at
how often I receive.
Now, I’ve covered a lot of information on
creatine up to this point, but I get this
question so often that I decided that addressing
it in a video was appropriate, and that question
is, should you mix your creatine in warm or
cold water.
Now most of the questions are likely the result
of a popular YouTube video that was posted
several years ago in which it was shown that
creatine powder does break down and dissolve
more effectively when you mix in warm water
as opposed to cold water, and it was then
claimed that this would maximize the absorption
of the creatine after consumption since it
will be better dissolved once it enters your
system.
But will this really make any measurable difference
overall, is it something that you should worry
about, and should you bother mixing your creatine
in warm water as opposed to cold water.
Well, although there are no concrete studies
available that directly compare this, and
of course I can’t say with 100% certainty,
in my view it’s highly unlikely that mixing
your creatine in warm water is going to enhance
its bottom line effects on muscle growth and
performance in any noticeable way, and there
are two main reasons for this.
First of all, as long as you’re using a
high quality creatine product, and I recommend
a pure monohydrate powder sourced from Creapure,
and I will link a product in the description
box that meets this criteria, the powder is
still going to be dissolved very effectively
regardless of the temperature of the water.
If your creatine significantly clumps up or
if it won’t break down when you try to mix
it, it’s likely not due to the temperature
of the water but is simply a result of using
a low-grade product.
And secondly, the temperature of your stomach
is around 98 degrees Fahrenheit, which is
about 38 degrees celcius, and it has a pH
level of around 2.
So once the creatine reaches your stomach,
whatever small amount of the powder that wasn’t
already dissolved in the water is then going
to be broken down further through the natural
digestive processes of your body in an environment
that is already very hot and extremely acidic.
It’s possible that mixing your creatine
in warm water might cause a very slight improvement
in its overall solubility, which may then
translate to a very slightly higher percentage
being absorbed, but the amount would likely
be so miniscule that it probably isn't going
to make any difference whatsoever in the overall
picture.
The only goal when it comes to creatine supplementation
is to maintain full creatine saturation of
the muscles through a 3-5 gram daily dose,
and having a couple percent more absorbed
by your body is almost certainly not going
to be a limiting factor in achieving this.
And again, this all assumes that mixing creatine
with warm water does in fact enhance its absorption
in ANY way, which we really don’t even know
in the first place.
The only situation where this approach may
be useful for you is if you tend to experience
stomach discomfort or bloating after consuming
creatine.
In that case, pre-dissolving it in a warm
water solution might help out.
However, stomach discomfort from creatine
use is also often primarily an issue of simply
using a low grade product, and so that’s
the first thing you’ll want to examine before
experimenting with the warm water approach.
So, what’s the bottom line here?
Make sure that you’re using a high quality
creatine product and then go ahead and simply
mix it with whatever liquid you would prefer
in terms of taste at whatever temperature
you would prefer.
However, if you are someone who does experience
stomach discomfort or bloating as a result
of creatine use, then you can try mixing it
with warm water to see if that helps.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
the icon at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.