Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this
video I want to share with you one of my top
recommended ab exercises which is the kneeling
rope crunch.
Now this is one of the very best movements
that you can do in the gym in order to effectively
target your abs using constant tension throughout
the entire range of motion, while keeping
the stress off of your lower back, and while
being able to easily achieve progressive overload
by consistently adding more resistance to
the exercise over time.
Now always keep in mind that having well defined
abs is largely just a product of having low
enough overall body fat percentage, and since
you can’t spot reduce fat from specific
areas of your body, doing ab exercises on
their own isn’t really going to do anything
for you at all in terms of achieving a “six
pack” if your body levels fat are too high.
But assuming that your body fat is low enough
then creating hypertrophy in the abs is going
to produce more visible definition and separation
of the muscles and basically just make them
“pop out” more.
So I currently use the kneeling rope crunch
as the primary ab exercise in my ab workouts,
and here’s how to go about performing them
properly.
So you’re going to set the cable at the
highest level on the cable machine and use
a rope attachment, and keep in mind that you
can also use a straight bar attachment as
well if you don’t have a rope handy.
Now if it’s more comfortable for you then
you can place a pad underneath your knees
but that’s up to you.
So just grab the rope, kneel down and place
your wrists on either side of your head.
Make sure to start with your hips back and
slightly flexed, a lot of people do their
rope crunches with their knees at a 90 degree
angle or even greater, but if you want to
get the strongest contraction in your abs
possible then you actually want to start the
movement with your hips back.
Now from there, while keeping your hips stationary,
just crunch down by flexing at the waist until
your elbows meet the middle of your thighs,
and then raise yourself back up again until
your spine is slightly hyper-extended.
Now always remember the obvious fact that
you’re trying to target your abs here, so
focus on crunching the weight down using your
waist rather than just thinking about pulling
the rope down with your hands, and also make
sure to consciously contract your abs throughout
the entire range of motion.
Obviously you need to continuing breathing
throughout the exercise but one thing that
I have found really helpful is to actually
blow the air out of your lungs before you
crunch down on each rep, and doing that is
going to help you contract your abs even harder.
Play around with this one until you find the
exact position that lets you feel your abs
working most strongly, everybody's body is
slightly different, and if you don’t feel
the exercise targeting your abs then you need
to experiment with it until you do because
if that's the case then it just means that
you’re not performing the exercise properly
for yourself.
Now, remember that the abs are a muscle just
like any other, and so there’s no reason
to do what so many other people do in the
gym by performing super light-weight high
rep sets on your ab exercises.
The abs respond to intensity and to progressive
overload in the same way that any other muscle
does, and so for the best results I’d recommend
using a rep range of anywhere from 8-15 reps
per set and for 3-4 sets total, and to focus
on gradually increasing the resistance over
time.
Again, cable crunches are one of the very
best exercises to include in your ab routine,
so give the kneeling cable rope crunch a try
and let me know what you think.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more helpful training tips along with
science-based nutrition and supplementation
advice to maximize your muscle building and
your fat burning progress, make sure to head
over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab
my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.