Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And today, I want to talk a little bit
about whey protein timing. Now, when it comes
to high quality protein, whey is at the very
top of the list. It delivers the most powerful
amino acid profile of any protein source in
the planet along with the highest overall
bioavailability. When you take into account
the convenience factor and the low cost per
serving, including whey protein in your diet
is pretty much a no brainer. But when is the
best time to take whey protein in order to
maximize its effects? Well, you'll hear a
lot of recommendations on this such as first
thing in the morning, before your workout,
in a post-workout shake or before bed. The
truth is that, all in all, the specific timing
of your whey protein consumption is probably
not going to make a huge difference to your
bottom line muscle building results. Most
trainees get way too hung up on minor, insignificant
details and end up losing sight of the big
picture. Nutrient absorption is an incredibly
slow process. And as long as you're consistently
hitting your protein, carb and fat needs each
day, the precise way that you map out your
diet in terms of timing and frequency is far
less important than most people think. Whether
you're consuming three meals per day with
your whey protein in the morning or five meals
a day with your whey at night or eight meals
a day with your whey at every meal, it's likely
not going to have a huge impact either way.
That said, if you do want to be as precise
as possible, then there are two time periods
where whey protein will probably give you
the biggest bang for your buck. The first
would be to use whey as a pre-workout protein
source within a couple hours of your training
session. And there are a few reasons for this.
The first is that whey is very high in branched-chain
amino acids, L-Leucine, L-Valine and L-Isoleucine.
And these are the primary amino acids that
are oxidized during weight training. Secondly,
there is some evidence to suggest that whey
protein increases fat burning when used as
a pre-workout protein source. Reason number
three, whey protein is light on the stomach.
And it provides a good source of pre-workout
protein without causing bloating or upset
stomach while you train. And the second time
period would be to use whey as a post-workout
protein source. Now, a common misconception
is the idea that you must consume a post-workout
shake immediately after your training session
is over to maximize muscle recovery and growth.
The important thing to keep in mind here is
that as long as you consumed a pre-workout
meal within a couple hours of training, those
same nutrients are still being broken down
and absorbed even after your workout is over.
And for that reason, there is no need to consume
protein immediately following your weight
training session. That said, I would still
recommend that you aim to get in a high quality
meal within about one to two hours of finishing
your workout in order to provide your body
with valuable nutrients during this time.
You do ultimately want to elevate insulin
levels to prevent muscle breakdown, and you
do want to provide your body with some amino
acids in order to support protein synthesis.
Now, whey is going to be the optimal choice
at this time, again, due to its strong amino
acid profile, particularly its high branched-chain
amino acid content, and its overall bioavailability.
In addition, if you're like me, and you find
that you don't have much of an appetite following
training sessions, then a liquid shake is
a great option at this time. So, the bottom
line when it comes to the question of whey
protein timing is this: Yes, whey is the highest
quality protein source available. And yes,
I do think that anyone who wants to maximize
their gains should be using it. However, the
specific timing of your whey protein consumption
will likely not make a huge difference to
your bottom line muscle building results.
That said, if you do want to get every muscle
building edge possible, then have a whey protein
shake about 1.5 to 2 hours prior to your workout,
followed by another one within about one to
two hours of completing your workout. And
that's really all there is to it. If you do
want to get your hands on some of the purest,
highest quality whey protein isolate available,
I would highly recommend checking out our
IsoM3 whey protein formula over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description box for that.
If you did find this information useful, please
make sure to like, comment, and subscribe
to stay up-to-date on our future videos. Don't
forget to grab your free 28-day mass building
plan, over on EliteImpactLabs.com. The link
is also in the description for that. And make
sure to join us over Facebook, where we do
free supplement giveaways every Thursday night.
Thanks again, for watching this video. And
I'll talk to you again soon.