Hey, what's up? This is Sean Nalewanyj, of
EliteImpactLabs.com. And today, I want to
give a review on liquid creatine syrup. Now,
if you've watch my other videos on creatine
supplementation, then you already know just
how highly I think of this supplement. Creatine
has been research proven time and time again
to have highly positive effects in bodybuilders
and athletes through its effects on strength
enhancement, muscle cell volumization and
lactic acid buffering, just to name a few.
Now, creatine is traditionally sold in powdered
form as creatine monohydrate. Several other
forms have been popping up over the years,
including creatine ethyl ester, creatine hydrochloride,
creatine citrate, et cetera. Now, another
aggressively marketed form is liquid creatine
serum, which is a 100% stable form of creatine
sold in a fancy dropper bottle in various
different flavors. Now, creatine serum is
marketed as being superior to powdered monohydrate
in a variety of ways. It's claimed to be more
absorbable, more stable and more effective
in the body. So, in order to make this review
as simple and straightforward as possible,
I'm just going to go ahead and list the main
claims that are commonly made about liquid
creatine serum along with a quick analysis
of each. So, claim number one is that liquid
creatine serum is absorbed faster and more
efficiently than powdered creatine monohydrate.
First of all, I'm not aware of any actual
studies or concrete evidence that show that
liquid creatine serum does in fact absorbs
faster than regular powdered creatine does.
You know, powdered creatine is normally dissolved
in liquid first before taking it. So theoretically
there should be no real difference between
the two. But even if this claim were true,
still wouldn't matter anyway, because creatine
absorption rate is largely irrelevant or almost
entire irrelevant. Creatine has no immediate
acute effects. And having your body absorb
your creatine at a faster rate, doesn't give
you any real advantage. When you supplement
with creatine consistently over a few weeks,
your muscles become saturated. And as a result,
that creatine will always be available for
use any time you train. Claim number two is
that liquid creatine serum does not cause
bloating like regular monohydrate. Now, this
is a typical example of where a supplement
company simply makes up a claim out of thin
air in order to make their competitor's product,
you know, seen inferior. Regular creatine
monohydrate does not cause bloating or puffy
looking muscles like so many companies claim.
It does increase your body's overall retention
of water. But that water is intra-cellular
and not subcutaneous. In other words, the
creatine pulls more water directly into the
muscle cell without storing any water directly
beneath your skin. So, if anything, creatine
monohydrate would actually cause you to appear
harder and more defined. If a company claims
that their form of creatine does not cause
bloating, you can be sure that it's a totally
baseless claim. Claim number three, due to
its rapid absorption rate, a loading phase
is not required when using creatine serum.
The reality is that there's no need to load
with any form of creatine, whether it's powdered
or not. Creatine loading is nothing more than
an optional method that allows you to achieve
the benefits of your creatine in a shorter
period of time. If you were to just go ahead
and consume 3grams of creatine each day with
no loading phase, your body would reach the
same saturation point within about three weeks.
Claim number four, liquid creatine serum is
easy on the kidneys. Of course it is, because
there's never been any demonstrated link between
creatine of any form and negative effects
on kidney function or overall health. Creatine
serum is easy on your kidneys, and so is powdered
creatine monohydrate. So in reality, all the
claims made about liquid creatine serum are
bullshit. But even so, is it still a reasonable
alternative to the powdered form? And the
answer here is no, and that is because of
the insane cost per serving. Because the supplement
companies selling liquid creatine serum, promote
it as being more absorbable than regular creatine
powder, they're able to get away with using
a ridiculously small amount of actual creatine
in their bottles. One of the top selling creatine
serum products out there right now, and you
can look this up for yourself, gives you 250mg
of creatine per serving, which is about 1/12th
of the 3,000mg that you will need to see full
effects, and it has 30 servings per bottle.
In other words, an entire bottle contains
7.5grams of total creatine, and it will cost
you $30, which is around 8 to 10 times the
cost of regular creatine monohydrate for something
equally or less effective. So unless the delicious
fruity taste of this stuff is worth 30 bucks
a bottle to you, you are far better off if
you just stick with a regular standard, micronized
creatine monohydrate. While consuming creatine
in liquid form might be okay under the right
circumstances, the extremely small bottle
and the serving size of liquid creatine serum
products renders them almost entirely useless.
So, thanks for watching this video. If you
do want to check out some legit research-based
muscle building supplements that are actually
worth your money, make sure to check out our
products over on EliteImpactLabs.com. The
link is in the description bar for that. Also
make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook
page, where we do free supplement giveaways
every Sunday night. And make sure to subscribe
to stay up-to-date on all of our future videos.
So, I hope you found this video useful. And
I'll talk to you again soon with more free
tips. See you.