Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj of EliteImpactLabs.com
here and in this video I just want to quickly
explain the difference between flaxseed oil
and fish oil and which one is a better source
for meeting your daily Omega-3 fatty acid
needs.
So fats play a variety of roles in your body
such as optimizing hormone levels, maintaining
proper brain and nervous system function,
protecting your joints and reducing inflammation,
and the most important type of fat that you
need to pay attention to in your diet are
the omega-3 fatty acids because these fatty
acids are responsible for a huge list of benefits
related both to body composition and overall
health and they can't be produced by your
body so you have to consume them through your
diet.
Saturated fats and Omega-6 fatty acids are
important as well but your daily allotment
of those fats will easily be met through your
consumption of animal proteins and other tag
along sources, and so for that reason there's
no real reason to pay specific attention to
your intake of those 2 types of fat.
So there are a variety of different food sources
that are rich in Omega-3 fatty acids.
Two of the most popular being fish oil and
flaxseed oil.
So the first thing to understand is that Omega-3
fatty acids are actually broken down into
3 separate compounds.
You have ALA, EPA and DHA.
Flaxseed oil is a source of fat that is rich
in ALA while fish oil contains high levels
of EPA and DHA, and once in your body a certain
portion of the ALA in flaxseed oil is actually
converted into EPA and DHA.
So if you review the actual research, it's
pretty clear that the majority of the benefits
that you obtain from Omega-3 intake are actually
produced by the EPA and DHA compounds, and
not only that but each compound seems to produce
its own unique benefits making each one important
in its own right.
Whether or not ALA actually produces any real
advantages on its own is not clear at this
time.
So it might seem that because the ALA in flaxseed
oil is converted into EPA and DHA that both
flaxseed oil and fish oil would be equally
beneficial sources, but the problem lies in
the fact that the conversion process of ALA
into EPA and DHA is very inefficient.
Now it depends on several factors but this
conversion can sometimes be as low as 5 to
10 percent in some cases, and not only that
but none of the ALA or resulting EPA is actually
converted into DHA.
And so for that reason fish oil is almost
certainly a superior source for maintaining
optimal Omega-3 fatty acid intake.
It provides a rich source of the active EPA
and DHA lipids that are readily available
for use by your body without the inefficient
conversion process that flaxseed oil undergoes.
Many studies have been conducted that show
a clear link between fish oil consumption
and direct bodybuilding benefits including
increased muscle growth, decreased muscle
catabolism, improved fat loss and reduced
inflammation and I've said it for a very long
time, but anybody who is serious about their
bodybuilding results and their overall health
should be supplementing with a high quality
fish oil every day at about 3 grams of combined
EPA and DHA which would be equal to around
4 to 10 grams of actual fish oil depending
on which brand you're using.
If you do want to get a supply of a very high
quality fish oil source then make sure to
check out EFA Ultra Pure.
The link is in the Description box for that.
That's a pure source of molecular distilled
Nordic sea fish oil with up to about 3 times
the EPA and DHA content of most popular brands,
and it's also enteric coated so it prevents
the "fish burps" that you get with alot of
other fish oil products.
So I hope you found the information in this
video helpful.
Please make sure to "like", comment and subscribe
if you did find it useful.
Also make sure to grab your free workout,
meal plan, and supplement guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com,
the link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the EliteImpact
Labs Facebook page for daily articles, videos
and free weekly supplement giveaways.
So thanks again for watching and I'll talk
to you again soon.