Maxing out regularly, so performing a one 
rep max lift, isn't completely uncommon,  
especially in the strength world. For instance , the bulgarian method, based on my limited reading,
appears to have involved maxing out daily on the 
snatch, clean and jerk, as well as squat variations. 
In the powerlifting world, it seems modifications 
of the bulgarian method exist. In this scenario,
maxing out is done with the back squat, deadlift, and bench press. Some reasons as to why regular one  
rep max training may be great for strength gains , involve improved motor learning with heavier loads  
and greater neural adaptations. But, what about 
muscle hypertrophy? We often associate numerous  
repetitions being effective for building muscle. 
But could one rep max training still be effective?
Two research papers can help us here. Let us begin 
with a study by Danekel and colleagues. 5 men,  
with at least one year of training experience,had 
one arm assigned to a one rep max arm and their  
other arm assigned to a volume arm. They trained 
both of their arms for 21 days straight. With the  
one rep max arm, they worked up to a one rep max 
on the unilateral dumbbell biceps curl each day. 
To prevent momentum, their backs and shoulders were 
kept against a wall. They also performed a maximum  
isometric contraction of the biceps at 60 degrees 
of elbow flexion, using a dynamometer. This was done  
for two contractions each lasting three seconds. 
With the volume arm, they did exactly what was  
done with the one rep max arm,so working up to a 
one rep max on the unilateral dumbbell biceps curl  
and performing the maximum isometric contraction. 
However, in addition to this, the arm performed  
three sets of 10 reps on the unilateral dumbbell 
biceps curl with a 70% one rep max load. Before  
, on day 8, day 15, day 21, and three days after 
the 21st session, thickness of the elbow flexors  
, which would have included the biceps brachii and 
brachialis, was measured at 50% 60% and 70%
of the upper arm length. Additionally, through the 
training protocol itself, one rep max on the dumbbell  
unilateral curl and maximal isometric contraction 
strength on the dynamometer was noted. Increases  
in one rep max strength and maximal isometric 
contraction strength were similar between both  
arms. However increases in elbow flexor thickness 
at all measured regions throughout the 21 days  
favored the volume arm versus the one rep max 
arm. Looking more carefully at the data, it's quite  
evident the one rep max arm experienced virtually 
no growth. Therefore, one rep max training for 21  
days straight on the dumbbell biceps curl does 
not appear to be effective for building muscle.  
Adding some volume, in this case three sets of 10
reps on the dumbbell biceps curl, appeared to be  
necessary for inducing muscle growth. Now, this 
study had subjects trained daily and the study  
was only 21 days in duration. What about rest days 
in between and a longer duration study? Mattocks  
and colleagues can help us. 17 men and 21 women, all 
untrained, were assigned to either a testing group  
or a hypertrophy group. Both groups trained 
the unilateral knee extension (they did train  
both legs) and chest press, twice per week for eight 
weeks. The hypertrophy group each session performed  
4 sets to failure with an 8-12 rep max load and 
90 seconds of rest between sets for each exercise,  
the testing group, each session, warmed up and 
worked up to a one-rep max for each exercise. 90  
seconds of rest was given between attempts. One rep 
max on the unilateral knee extension for both legs  
and chest press was measured before and after for 
both groups. Also, thickness of the anterior thigh  
and lateral thigh was measured at 50%, 60%, and 70% of the thigh  
length before and after for both groups. Note, the 
anterior thigh would have included the rectus  
femoris and vastus medialis, while the lateral 
thigh would have included the vastus lateralis. 
Increases in unilateral knee extension one rep max 
for both legs and chest press one rep max were  
statistically similar between both groups. For all 
measures of anterior and lateral thigh thickness, 
the results favor the hypertrophy group. 
However, for all measures done on the legs  
for the lateral thigh, the differences were 
not classified as statistically significant. 
Similarly, at 60% and 70% of the anterior thigh 
for the dominant leg, differences were also not  
classified as statistically different. Even so, it's evident that overall, the hypertrophy group  
experienced much greater growth than the 
testing group. The before and after changes  
for each group further demonstrate this. Looking at the testing group results, we  
can see that for nearly all measures, there were 
virtually no increases, rather slight decreases.  
Conversely, the hypertrophy group experienced 
increases across virtually all measures. 
To sum up, the study by Dankel and colleagues 
and Mattocks and colleagues appear to suggest  
that one rep max training, although effective for 
strength gain, isn't effective for building muscle.  
These findings would support the idea that one 
rep max training likely produces significant  
strength gains through neural adaptations and/or 
improved motor skills, rather than muscle growth. 
For building muscle, the current evidence indicates 
that reps between 5 and 35, roughly equating to  
loads between 85% one rep max and 30% one 
rep max produce similar muscle growth, provided  
repetitions are performed to failure. Which is 
the point at which no more repetitions can be  
performed. Interestingly, there does exist some 
research exploring the use of heavy sets of 2 to 4  
for hypertrophy. I plan to cover this 
in another video, so stay tuned for that :)