Hey, what’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com.
And in this video here, I want to give you
guys my answer to the question of what the
best cutting diet is to lose fat and to get
lean?
Now, this is going to be sort of a slightly
different take on the subject, because when
most people go about trying to structure the
best fat loss diet for themselves, they tend
to think only in terms of bottom line effect
of this, you know, what method is going to
burn fat as fast as possible.
And in doing that, the very important issue
of adherence, that tends to get overlooked.
In other words, the diet might be effective,
but are you actually going to be able to stick
to it over the long-term in order to actually
reach your fat loss goals?
Now, we already know from statistics and just
from basic everyday observation that the majority
of people who start a fat loss diet will not
end up sticking to it over the long-term.
We already know that for sure.
And among many different reasons is the simple
fact that the cutting diet itself just isn’t
sustainable.
It might involve too large of a calorie deficit,
it might be too restrictive.
It might be based around a bunch of different
rules that just aren’t practical for your
lifestyle.
Or just might be based on certain guidelines
that you really don’t enjoy following.
For example, some people do really well following
an intermittent fasting style approach.
So, pushing all of their calories into a smaller
feeding window.
Whereas there are other people who prefer
eating smaller meals spread all throughout
the day.
Now, that’s just a matter of personal preference,
and either one ultimately works.
But if you’re trying to force yourself into
a fat loss plan that deep down you really
dislike, you might stick with it for a few
weeks or a few months.
But eventually you’re probably going to
burn out, you’re probably going to get frustrated
and you’re probably going to quit.
And then, if you do quit, it’s going to
make things even harder moving forward, because
your confidence will go down and you’ll
be less likely to start back up again.
So, what is the best cutting diet for losing
fat and keeping it off?
Well, my simple answer to most people would
be this, the best cutting diet is whatever
diet, assuming you have the basic fundamentals
down, which I’ll touch on shortly, but it’s
whatever diet allows you to maintain a calorie
deficit long enough to reach your goals.
Very simple answer, but it is something that
a lot of people ignore.
So, regardless of what anyone tries to tell
you, fat loss ultimately comes down to the
simple act of expending more energy than you
take in.
So, burning more calories than you consume,
A.K.A.
a calorie deficit.
And then, maintaining that state long enough
to lose whatever amount of fat you’re trying
to burn.
And again, regardless of what people trying
to sell you miracle programs or supplements,
regardless of what they might say, that’s
not easy.
It’s not an easy thing to do.
It does require hard work.
It does require discipline.
And it does require patience.
When you put your body into a calorie deficit,
you are going to experience a certain level
of hunger at certain periods in the day.
That’s normal.
You will experience cravings.
And on top of that, your energy levels will,
overall, be lower than they were when you
were eating and maintenance or when you were
eating in a surplus.
Now, that’s just the nature of the process
and it is a challenge.
And the reason why most people can’t stick
to it is because they just don’t stack the
odds heavily enough in their favor.
They try to maintain that deficit, but they
don’t lay out their cutting diet in a way
that is sustainable for them.
Bottom line defect in this is one thing.
But if you can’t maintain it long enough
to reach your goal, then obviously, it’s
going to be totally useless for you.
For example, fat loss diet A, might produce
say 2 pounds of fat loss per week.
But if your goal is to lose 20 pounds, and
you can only stick to that diet for a month
before falling off, then ultimately it’s
still going to be a failure.
On the other hand, if diet B, produces, say
half of that, so maybe 1 pound of fat loss
per week, but you can easily maintain that
for all 20 weeks, then clearly it’s going
to be the superior approach for you.
So, again, get the basic fundamentals down
first.
So, that means a
few things.
It means, getting enough protein each day.
You’ll hear different recommendations for
this.
And more and more research is coming out that
starting to show that we do need even less
protein than we thought.
But let’s say, at least 0.8 grams per pound
of body weight daily, that’s what I’d
recommend right now.
I personally like to go a little bit higher
around 1 gram just to be safe.
But again, anywhere from 0.8 gram to 1 gram
will ultimately be, probably be fine.
You also want to make sure you’re getting
enough fat each day.
So, I’d say, not much lower than around
20 percent of your total calories.
And you want to make sure that your fiber
and your micronutrient needs are being met
by getting in a couple servings of vegetables,
and fruits and just making sure that the bulk
of your diet is coming from minimally processed
whole foods.
So, once you have those basics down, again,
just stack the odds in your favor.
If you like bigger meals less frequently or
smaller meals more frequently, then choose
whichever one you prefer.
You might want to allocate a higher percentage
or a lower percentage of your calories to
the earlier parts or the later parts of the
day.
In terms of food choices, keep in mind that
there are no mandatory fat-burning foods that
you must eat.
So, just choose foods in each category.
So, protein, carbs and fats, choose the foods
that you prefer most.
If you don’t like brown rice, then don’t
eat brown rice.
If you like yogurt as opposed to cottage cheese
or chicken rather than red meat, then make
those choices.
Or if you have certain fruits and veggies
that you really like, then just stick to those.
If you have a certain foods that you really
like and that you crave like let’s say,
chocolate for example, then allocate a certain
percentage of your calories each day towards
enjoying some chocolate, in that way you won’t
feel deprived.
Another thing to take into account is just
the overall size of your calorie deficit.
Now, I personally like to use a larger deficit
over a shorter time frame, because that way
I can just get my cutting diet over with faster.
But on the other hand, my good friend, Fernando,
he just finished losing around 30 pounds or
so, but he was using a smaller deficit over
a longer period of time.
Again, it’s just personal preference.
And ultimately either one works.
So, bottom line guys, the best cutting diet
for most people is whatever diet allows you,
so you personally, to maintain a net calorie
deficit over time.
Whatever cutting diet keeps you in a calorie
deficit on an ongoing basis long enough to
reach your goals without quitting is ultimately
going to be a successful diet.
So, get the fundamentals down, you know, the
protein, the fat, the fiber, the micronutrients.
And then, set up your daily diet in the way
that you enjoy most in terms of meal frequency,
meal spacing, food choices, calorie deficit
size, et cetera.
If you just take some time and effort to structure
it this way, rather than just jumping head
first into some crazy fat loss diet based
around a bunch of rules that may or may not
fit your lifestyle or your preferences.
If you do that, your chances for long-term
fat-burning success are going to be exponentially
higher.
Now, obviously if you have to get lean for
a certain date, so say maybe you’re doing
a show or a photo shoot obviously, that’s
a different situation.
But I’m just talking here to the average
person who just wants to lose some fat, lean
down and lower their overall body fat percentage
over time.
So, thanks for watching this video guys.
If you do want to get a complete step-by-step
roadmap, in terms of training, nutrition,
supplements for losing fat while also showing
you how to customize that plan to your exact
needs, then you can check out my complete
body transformation blueprint system over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description.
If you found these tips helpful, make sure
to share the video, like, comment and subscribe.
And you can also check out my official blog
over at Seannal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you guys again soon.