What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.SeanNal.com, a lot of
you guys have mentioned that you like when
I add these, sort of, mindset types of videos
into the mix.
So today I want to give some of my thoughts
on the question: Does building muscle build
confidence and in what way and to what degree.
And this is obviously a pretty subjective
thing.
It’s a very complex topic but I’ll just
give you a few pieces of my advice based on
my experience and what I’ve seen over the
years in other people as well.
So the way I would sum it up would be to say
that, yes hitting the gym and feeling good
about how you look physically will increase
your overall confidence levels.
However, it’s not a magic bullet by any
means because there are many different factors
beyond that that are going to influence how
confident or how unconfident you feel as a
whole.
So what I will do in most cases is a few things.
First off, again, if you build some muscle,
you lose some fat and that genuinely makes
you feel good about how you look.
That will affect your overall confidence levels
in a positive way for the most people.
If you look in the mirror and you like what
you see from a physical perspective, you like
the way your clothes fit, you have some decent
muscular development and you’re in a healthy
body fat range, you’ll probably going to
feel more confident overall as a result to
that.
Some people might call that vain or shallow,
but the truth is that everyone cares about
how they look to certain degree.
I’m not saying it’s the only thing or
it’s the most important thing by any means,
but it is a thing.
I’m definitely not saying that everybody
needs to be huge and shredded, that’s not
my goal either.
But just generally having a fit looking body
is something that, pretty much everybody would
like to have and would feel more confident
overall with.
Second, and this is the big one, is the confidence
that you’ll get from seeing that you’re
capable of setting a goal, putting in the
consistent hard work and then reaching that
goal.
And that’s also likely going to spillover
into other areas of your life as well.
So let’s say that you are naturally skinny
and you decide that you want to be stronger
and more muscular.
And you go ahead and achieved that, what that
does is give you first hand evidence that
you do have the discipline and the patience,
and just the overall ability to bring about
changes in your life.
So maybe now you start thinking, I’ve accomplished
that, so I wonder what else I can do.
And maybe that means starting a business or
finding the job or career that you truly want,
or creating the type of social life that you
want, or taking on some other type of skill.
The basics lesson that you’ll learn in the
gym often end up having a, sort of, domino
effect throughout other parts of your life
and that helps you build up your overall self
esteem and self confidence as well.
And then thirdly, just the basic act of lifting
weights and doing cardio and having good eating
habits in and off itself, those things directly
put you into a better and more confidence
state of mind just on the physical level because
they optimize those feel good neurotransmitters
and that give that sense of accomplishment
throughout the week every time you train.
So when you just feel good physically, that
in and off itself makes you feel more confident.
So all in all building muscle and being in
good shape in most cases will increase your
confidence to a certain degree, both directly
and a having a spillover effect into other
life areas.
Now that said, like I’d mention at the start,
it’s definitely not a magic bullet and building
muscle and being in shape is not going to
automatically fix things if you have other
insecurities that are running in a deeper
level.
A lot of guys who are just starting out and,
I started lifting pretty you so I don’t
remember what my exact [Indiscernible] was
like back then, but I’m pretty sure I thought
the same thing if I recall correctly, but
basically that you’re going to go into the
gym and you’re going to build the strong,
powerful looking physique and that’s going
to transform you into the supremely confident
person who just doesn’t give a fuck and
just commands every room and just gets all
the girls.
And that probably comes from things like movies
and advertising and social media and stuff
like that, but that’s just not realistic
at all.
And that’s almost certainly not how it’s
going to go for you.
Lifting and being in shape will give you an
overall boost to your confidence but it’s
still just a boost.
Because you have to keep in mind that there
are many different factors that will affect
your overall confidence levels.
And that confidence itself can also be largely
a contextual thing.
It’s perfectly possible to feel confident
in one area of life but not in another.
You might feel confident at your job but unconfident
in the gym, or confident in the gym but unconfident
in social situations, or confident in social
situations but unconfident in your ability
to make money.
These different areas will usually have overlap
between them but often they do need to be
dealt with individually to a certain degree.
For example, you’re not going to magically
become socially confident just by building
muscle or by being leaner.
It will help, but being socially confident
largely comes from feeling comfortable with
yourself on a deeper level and from feeling
confident in tor social abilities desensethising[sp?]
yourself to social situations.
And you do that by socializing, not by lifting
weight.
So it will help, but if you think that you’re
going to go hibernate in the gym and spend
two years building a great physique, and then
you just going to emerge as this supremely
confident social powerhouse then prepare to
be disappointed because that’s not going
to happen.
And if anything you’ll probably come out
even less socially confident than before if
all you’ve been doing is isolating yourself
and devoting all your time and effort to bodybuilding.
And then underneath all of this, everything
I’ve talked about so far.
And I’m not going to turn this into some
deep psychology lecture because I’m not
an expert in this and I can only relay my
own experience and what I think about it.
But I think true core confidence goes deeper
than any of these, sort of, on the surface
external things.
At the deeper level confidence really just
comes down to knowing who you are and what
your values are, and being truly comfortable
with it.
And not being afraid to live in alignment
with it.
So interestingly building muscle and being
in shape does build confidence overall but
it sort of a more on the surface thing in
a lot of ways.
Which is fine because we’d be kidding ourselves
to pretend that external things don’t matter
or that they don’t have any effect, but
deeper confidence as I see it would be taking
care of your body and being happy with it
on that surface level but also not putting
too much stock in it, and not being too overly
attached to it.
And I know for myself, but that’s definitely
when I feel the most confident overall.
It’s when I’m training hard and eating
well, and I like how my body looks physically,
but to where I’m not really thinking about
it too much, or looking in the mirror every
five minutes or getting preoccupied over the
tiny details, or on how other people are perceiving
me.
And that’s why, sort of, paradoxically some
of the people who are in the very best shape
can often be the ones who are actually the
most insecure.
That’s because their identity is so heavily
invested in this one external thing and a
huge portion of their self worth is literally
tied to whether their body fat is one or two
percent higher or lower, or if their biceps
are sixteen and a half inches versus sixteen
and a quarter inch.
And then also the people who are the most
driven to seek that external validation are
usually doing that because internally they’re
not really quite happy with themselves and
they trying to fill that void.
So like I said, true self confidence at the
end of the day is largely an internal thing.
And if deep down you just don’t really like
yourself and you can’t accept yourself for
whatever reason, then no amount of muscle
growth, or money, or women, or status, or
anything else on the outside is ultimately
going to fix that.
Because you’ll always feel sort of a certain
emptiness inside that has to be addressed
at a deeper level.
So, I’ll leave it at that.
Those are just some of my thoughts, yes, absolutely
get into the gym, train hard, build some muscle
and strength, maintain a healthy body fat,
feeling doo about how you look and feeling
more physically attractive, that’s all well
and good and in the overall picture it will
boost up your self confidence as long as it’s
coming from a healthy place and you aren’t
taking it to the full on extreme as a way
of, sort of, trying to fix yourself.
But again, it’s just one piece of the equation
on your overall journey.
And also keep in mind that this idea of developing
perfect, unshakeable confidence is not really
realistic anyway because we’re all human
and feeling some self doubt and some insecurity
to a certain degree, I think is just the default
piece of our programming and it’s never
going to go away entirely, and that’s fine.
So, I hope this was helpful.
Feel free to share your thoughts on this topic
on the comments below.
If you enjoyed the video make sure to hit
the like button and subscribe.
My official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
and I will talk to you guys again soon.