It's far from uncommon to run 
across content claiming to  
detail the best exercises or best 
workout programs for hypertrophy.
For example, you might have heard certain 
compound exercises such as back squats or  
conventional deadlifts being described as 
the most effective for building muscle.  
Other times, they are called 
the "king of all exercises".
However, I want to describe why I think when 
overviewing the current exercise selection  
literature, as well as the literature on 
muscle hypertrophy stimuli, the concept of  
there being the best exercise, or the best couple 
of exercises, for hypertrophy makes little sense.
For one, there does not appear to be an 
optimal exercise modality for hypertrophy.
A recent meta-analysis by 
Heidel et al. established  
free weights and machine exercises were 
comparably effective for hypertrophy.
Adding some extra detail, one study by Schwanbeck 
et al. compared an exclusive free weight program  
(consisting of exercises such as back squats 
and e-z bar curls) to an exclusive machine  
program (consisting of exercises such as smith 
machine back squats and machine biceps curls).
After 8 weeks of training, increases in thickness  
of the biceps and quadriceps were 
similar between both programs.
Bodyweight exercises are 
likely no less effective too.
Kikuchi and Nakazato found that 
bodyweight push-up variations and a 40%  
one-rep max flat barbell bench press 
evoked similar pectorlais major and  
triceps thickness increases 
after 8 training weeks.
Note, a 40% one-rep max load is perfectly fine 
for muscle hypertrophy, Quite a bit of evidence  
indicates loads between 30% and 85% one-rep max 
produce similar growth, provided repetitions are  
performed to volition failure (which was 
done in the Kikuchi and Nakazato study).
Moreover, though notable limitations with 
muscle excitation studies exist, a number of  
them find when push-ups are load equated to bench 
presses (either via comparing light load bench  
pressing to bodyweight push-ups, or via comparing 
weighted push-ups to heavier load bench pressing),  
both exercises similarly generate excitation 
of pectoralis major, triceps, and front delts.
The findings of these various 
studies make sense. Let me explain.
The current literature on the 
stimuli of muscle hypertrophy  
indicates mechanical tension may be 
the primary hypertrophy stimulus.
Mechanical tension is equal to the force generated 
by muscle fibers. Components within muscle fibers,  
called "mechanosensors" can detect the 
force produced by a muscle fiber and  
thereafter transduce these forces into a signaling 
cascade the results in muscle fiber hypertrophy.
Following on from this, to 
maximize a muscle's growth,  
we'd want to recruit as many muscle 
fibers as possible and have them  
sustain at least decent amounts of their 
respective forces for a fair duration.
The key point here is this 
can be accomplished with  
any exercise modality. Your body possesses no 
mechanism to know if free weights, machines,  
or body weight is being utilized to stimulate 
muscle fiber recruitment and force generation.
So long as you perform between roughly 5 and 
35 repetitions (and those repetitions are  
performed with 3 or fewer reps in reserve) with 
a free weight, machine, or bodyweight exercise,  
the aforementioned conditions are likely 
achieved. That is, the working muscles in  
the exercise likely experience maximal muscle 
fiber recruitment, and the individual muscle  
fibers likely sustain at least decent amounts 
of their respective forces for a fair duration.
Before moving on, there is another component 
to mechanical tension worth touching on.  
This is passive tension.
When muscle fibers are sufficiently stretched,  
a component within it called titin 
produces passive tension while elongating.
A rubber band can help you conceptualize 
passive tension. When stretching a rubber band,  
it produces tension (analogous to force) to try 
and resist stretch. Titin operates comparably.
Mechnosensors, potentially within titin 
itself, can detect this passive force  
and transduce it into a signaling cascade 
that produces muscle fiber hypertrophy.
Generally, exercises that involve a 
good stretch of the working muscle  
or muscles can involve high 
amounts of passive tension.
Numerous free weight, machine, and 
bodyweight exercises can involve a  
good stretch of the working muscle or muscles. 
For example, a barbell back squat, hack squat,  
or pistol squat all accomplish a good stretch 
of the quadriceps and gluteus maximus.
Another reason why the concept of the best 
exercise or exercises makes little sense is  
for optimizing growth across many regions of a 
muscle, exercise variety is likely important.
Costa et al. allocated 22 detrained men  
(they had not trained in the previous 6 
months) into a non-varied or varied group.
Both groups trained for 8 weeks. 
The non-varied group performed  
the exact same exercises for their 
muscle groups three times per week.
The non-varied group, across the 3 days, performed 
different exercises for their muscle groups.
Both groups trained each exercise 
with 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions,  
using 90-120 seconds of rest between sets.
Before and after the study, thickness 
of the upper, middle, and lower regions  
of the rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, 
elbow flexors, and triceps were measured.
Overall, although increases in thickness 
were similar between both groups at a  
couple of regions, increases at other 
regions favored the varied group.
Accordingly, this data demonstrates performing 
around 3 different exercises per muscle group  
each week results in greater growth 
across more regions of a muscle.
This is logical. Typically, 
different regions of a muscle,  
or the different muscles in a muscle 
group, do not function in complete unison.
Rather, the different regions of a muscle, 
or the different muscles in a muscle group,  
are activated to different degrees during 
movements that contrast in some way.
For example, Nunes et al. established performing 
calf presses with the feet rotated outwards  
results in preferential growth of the medial 
gastrocnemius, while calf presses with the  
feet rotated inwards evoked preferential 
growth of the lateral gastrocnemius.
As for example on the muscle group level, although 
back squats seem to do a great job at stimulating  
the vasti muscles of the quadriceps (that is, the 
vastus medialis, intermedius, and lateralis), they  
fail to meaningfully target the rectus femoris. 
Yet, leg extensions or reverse nordic curls (which  
involve more isolated knee motion with little hip 
motion) preferentially grow the rectus femoris.
On the account of all this, by training a 
certain muscle group with a few different  
exercises that vary in some way (either 
via the angle used, joint positioning,  
or hand orientation), you most likely 
end up growing more regions of a muscle.
Therefore, saying there's a single best 
exercise for a muscle misses the notion  
different exercises collectively contribute 
towards more uniformly growing a muscle.
The final reason I think is worth discussing 
on why the concept of the best exercise or  
exercises makes little sense 
relates to individual differences.
With the same exercise,  
not all individuals recruit and stimulate 
the same musculature to the same degree.
Stronska et al.'s data indicate the relative 
recruitment of the pectoralis major,  
triceps, and anterior deltoid differed between 
individuals on the bench press. Some individuals  
preferentially recruited the pectoralis major, 
some the anterior deltoid, and others the triceps.
Likewise, Boyer et al. observed during 
nordic curls and stiff-legged deadlifts,  
recruitment of the various hamstring 
muscles differed amongst individuals.
These findings highlight the notion that just 
because one individual grew a certain way with  
one exercise, this does not necessarily 
guarantee the same will occur for you.
As a final point, I should emphasize 
that by no means am I saying every  
single exercise in existence 
is optimal for building muscle.
Unquestionably there exist factors that 
would result in certain exercises being  
more favorable for hypertrophy. It's just 
that even with these factors in mind,  
a whole host of exercises are still 
highly effective for hypertrophy.
Even so, let us briefly overview 
factors that could make an  
exercise more or less effective for hypertrophy.
If the muscle you're attempting to train 
is not the limiting factor in an exercise,  
chances are it's a suboptimal movement.
Take a bosu ball pistol squat. Your 
balance and stability are probably  
going to limit your performance more than 
force production from the main muscles.  
Consequently, a whole host of other 
exercises that provide a more stable  
environment are more optimal, be it back 
squats, hack squats, or assisted pistol squats.
Another factor relates to achieving a stretch. 
The current evidence is increasingly leaning  
towards the idea that exercises that achieve a 
good stretch of the working muscle or muscles  
may be a more powerful hypertrophy stimulus versus  
exercises that only train the 
muscle in a shortened length.
There are an array of exercises for 
each muscle that involve good stretches.
Finally, personal preferences for one 
reason or another may be important too.  
If certain exercises, either due to 
your natural anatomy or injury history,  
are uncomfortable or painful, chances are 
you're better off performing other movements.
In a different scenario, if you're someone who 
utilizes the mind-muscle connection, and you find  
you're able to best achieve this with an exercise 
like the dumbbell curl as opposed to barbell curl,  
hypertrophy outcomes could potentially 
be better with the dumbbell variation.
That brings us to the end of the video. As always,  
thank you for watching, I hope you found the 
video interesting and informative in some way!