Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com with a quick
Q&A video for you, and the question today
is, is it really necessary to measure body
fat percentage when you’re trying to lean
down and lose fat.
Now it might seem like the obvious answer
here would be yes, since measuring your body
fat percentage is going to show you how much
of your weight loss is coming from fat and
how much of it is coming from lean body mass,
but in my view if you’re just an average
person who is just looking to get lean while
sparing muscle, and you’re not a competitive
athlete or someone who is trying to reach
a very specific condition, I actually don’t
think it’s necessary at all in most cases.
First of all, getting an accurate body fat
percentage reading is actually very difficult
in the first place and if you’re trying
to do it on your own then there’s going
to be a pretty considerable margin for error.
Online calculators where you just plug in
different body part measurements in order
to get a body fat percentage reading, those
are not accurate at all, the “body fat scales”
that you might have seen at your gym are also
not accurate, and when it comes to using calipers,
unless you’re very skilled at using them
and your body fat level is already reasonably
low to begin with then they aren’t going
to be a very reliable method either, and even
if you can come decently close using calipers,
again if you’re using it to track your progress
then even if you’re consistently off by
1 or 2% it’s really not going to do you
any good and if anything it could just be
a negative thing because it’s just going
to confuse you as to what type of progress
you’re actually making.
The more accurate methods are going to be
using a bod pod, or underwater weighing or
a dexa scan, but even those have pitfalls
as well, and they’re going to cost around
$100-$200 at a time, so it’s really not
going to be practical for most people to use
those methods on a consistent basis anyway.
Now if you do want to use one of those methods
just to estimate your overall body fat percentage
out of curiosity just to see where you might
be at then that's fine and you can go for
it, but in terms of using it specifically
as a progress tracking method, I really wouldn’t
bother.
And the good news here is that you really
don’t need it in order to track your fat
burning progress effectively anyway.
If your program is properly structured, meaning
that you aren’t using an overly aggressive
calorie deficit and you're just staying somewhere
around 500 calories or so below maintenance,
your protein intake is sufficient so around
1 gram of protein per pound of body weight
daily, you’re including some heavy resistance
training in your plan, and you’re consistently
losing the standard 1-2 pounds per week, maybe
slightly higher if you’re significantly
over weight, then you’re already going to
know that the majority of your weight loss
is coming in the form of body fat rather than
lean mass anyway, and so for that reason just
using your basic weight scale in combination
with the mirror or some progress pictures
if you want to be more objective, and maybe
some basic body part measurements as well,
those methods are easily going to be enough
to accurately track your fat loss and to make
the proper adjustments over time.
Trying to measure body percentage isn’t
really going to give you any practical information
that you can do anything with anyway, especially
considering that it probably isn’t going
to be very accurate in the first place.
So thanks for watching, I hope you found this
Q&A useful.
If you want to get my complete step-by-step
roadmap for building muscle and losing fat
in the most efficient way possible then you
can grab my complete Body Transformation Blueprint
system over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the icon at the top of the video
or by using the link in the description box
below.
If you did enjoy the video as always please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment, and subscribe to stay up-to-date.
And you can also check out my official blog
at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.