When training under certain variables, 
lifting weights can temporarily increase the  
concentrations of a variety of systemic anabolic 
hormones, such as testosterone and growth hormone.
Based on my assessment of the literature, 
it seems performing exercises that involve  
a large amount of muscle mass, using moderate 
loads and rap ranges with a good number of sets  
and short rest intervals evokes the greatest 
temporary increases in anabolic hormones.
As an example, one paper established that 
performing 10 sets of 10 repetitions with a  
70% one-rep max load on the back squat (with 
the load adjusted on a set by set basis to  
ensure the achievement of 10 repetitions) 
generated significant temporary elevations  
in total testosterone, free testosterone, and 
growth hormone. On the whole, these spikes peak  
anywhere from immediately after to 60 minutes 
after the training session and thereafter fall.
For quite a long time, there have been hypotheses 
that these temporary spikes in anabolic hormones  
triggered via lifting weights could be 
important for long-term muscle hypertrophy.
So much so that there have been a considerable 
number of studies only assessing the temporary  
anabolic hormonal responses to using 
a variety of training variables.  
The idea behind these studies is that by 
establishing which training variables and  
exercises best generate anabolic hormonal spikes, 
we would know what optimally builds muscle.
This isn't entirely a ludicrous idea, spiking 
the concentrations of anabolic hormones via  
lifting weights could theoretically increase the 
likelihood they exert their anabolic effects.
Let me explain.
We know that circulating testosterone 
(more precisely free testosterone)  
can bind to what we call androgen receptors 
located within muscle fibers and thereafter  
prompt an increase in muscle protein synthesis  
(which in our case simply references an increase 
in the proteins that make muscles bigger).
Testosterone can also bind to a membrane-bound 
receptor to activate something called the  
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, which is quite a well-known 
signaling pathway where a variety of specific  
proteins interact in a chain reaction fashion to 
generate an increase in muscle protein synthesis.
Considering these events, a spike in circulating 
testosterone evoked via lifting weights could  
theoretically increase the likelihood they 
occur, presumably amplifying muscle hypertrophy.
Comparably, growth hormone is primarily believed 
to exert its anabolic effects via stimulating  
an increase in IGF-1 production from the liver, 
IGF-1 thereafter can activate the PI3K/Akt/mTOR  
pathway. Therefore, a spike in growth 
hormone concentrations evoked via lifting  
weights could theoretically increase 
the likelihood this event occurs.
Aside from these gene expression 
events, there are also nongenomic  
roles by which a spike in anabolic hormones 
could heighten long-term muscle hypertrophy.
Testosterone can increase the concentrations 
of calcium within muscle fibers.  
Calcium plays a fundamental role in 
force-producing events. Due to this, a spike in  
testosterone within a workout can boost calcium 
concentrations within muscle fibers, thereby  
enhancing force production which could enhance 
the degree of tension experienced by the muscle,  
ultimately leading to more muscle hypertrophy as 
mechanosensitive proteins within muscle fibers  
detect tension and thereafter convert tension into  
a signaling cascade that culminates in 
an increase in muscle protein synthesis.
All of these hypotheses sound 
plausible and interesting.  
However, do they truly occur in reality?
In other words, should you be aiming to 
train in a way that maximally spikes the  
anabolic hormone response in order to 
optimally stimulate muscle hypertrophy?
From the current literature, I believe there 
are at least 2 ways we could evaluate this.
The first way is to evaluate the correlation  
between spikes in anabolic hormones 
and long-term muscle hypertrophy.
That is, do the individuals that experience the 
greatest spikes in anabolic hormones ultimately  
experience the greatest muscle hypertrophy. If 
so, we would have some evidence that temporary  
spikes in anabolic hormones evoked via lifting 
weights may be important for building muscle.
The second way is to compare a training program 
that generates greater temporary spikes in  
anabolic hormones to one that generates lesser (or 
even non-existent) spikes in anabolic hormones.  
If muscle hypertrophy is greater with 
a training program that generates  
greater spikes in anabolic hormones, we 
would have further potential evidence  
indicating temporary elevations 
in anabolic hormones is important.
Let us dive into the current literature, 
starting with the correlation data.
Intriguingly, two studies have 
indeed observed a correlation  
between the magnitude of spikes in anabolic 
hormones and long-term muscle hypertrophy.
Mangine et al. had 33 men with an average 
of 5.7 years of training experience perform  
a range of exercises 4 times per week for 8 weeks.
Every session, subjects trained 
each exercise for 4 sets with 3-12  
repetitions with 70-90% one-rep max load, 
using 1 to 3 minutes of rest between sets.
Blood samples taken at various time points 
during training sessions on the first  
and last week successfully demonstrated 
training immediately temporarily spiked  
testosterone, IGF-1, and growth hormone.
Moreover, by the end of the 8th week, thickness 
and cross-sectional area of the rectus femoris and  
vastus lateralis (measured at approximately 
50% of the thigh bone length) increased.
Most relevant to our discussion, a thorough 
analysis of the data indicates there was a  
relationship between the temporary spikes in 
testosterone and muscle hypertrophy. In other  
words, it appears the subjects that experienced 
the greatest temporary increases in testosterone  
concentrations as a result of training ultimately 
experienced the highest increases in thickness and  
cross-sectional area of the rectus femoris 
and vastus lateralis. The temporary spikes  
of other hormones, including growth hormone, 
did not seem predictive of muscle hypertrophy.
However, another study by Mccall et 
al. somewhat conflicts with this data.
11 men with prior resistance training experience 
performed a range of exercises each for 3 sets  
with a 10 rep-max load, using 1 minute of rest 
between sets, three times per week for 12 weeks.
Blood samples taken at various time 
points during training sessions in  
the 4th and 8th week demonstrated that training 
successfully temporarily elevated growth hormone  
concentrations, but had little impact on 
testosterone and IGF-1 concentrations.
Measurements taken before and after 
the 8 training weeks revealed training  
increased whole biceps cross-sectional 
area and cross-sectional area of slow  
and fast-twitch fibers obtained from the biceps.
Relevant to our discussion, the temporary 
spikes in growth hormone correlated with  
increases in slow-twitch as well as fast-twitch 
fiber cross-sectional area gains. In other words,  
those that experienced the highest temporary 
elevations in growth hormone evoked via training  
tended to experience the most growth of the 
fast and slow-twitch fibers of the biceps.
There were no other correlations, implying 
contrary to the Mangine study, there was no  
association between testosterone spikes and 
hypertrophy. However, recall testosterone  
concentrations were virtually unaffected via 
training, and so this may explain this finding.
Overall, the results of this Mcall et al. study 
are a little difficult to wrap our heads around.  
Although a correlation between growth hormone 
spikes and slow and fast-twitch fiber growth  
was noted, there was no correlation 
between growth hormones spikes and  
increases in whole biceps cross-sectional 
area, which is difficult to reconcile.
What's also difficult to reconcile is IGF-1 
concentrations were virtually unimpacted  
via training, and as we noted earlier, 
it's thought growth hormone primarily  
exerts its anabolic effects via stimulating an 
increase in IGF-1 production from the liver.
Nonetheless, these two studies by Mangine and 
Mcall, despite conflicting to some degree and  
having some inconsistencies, broadly indicate 
some relationship between temporary hormones  
spikes generated via lifting weights 
and long-term muscle hypertrophy.
However, 4 other studies find very weak or 
non-existent associations between temporary  
spikes in anabolic hormones and 
long-term muscle hypertrophy.
West and Phillips found that after 56 men 
(untrained at least in the last 8 months  
before the study) trained a variety of exercises 
each for 2-4 sets of 6-12 reps 5 times per week  
for 12 weeks, there was no correlation between 
temporary spikes in free testosterone and growth  
of slow and fast-twitch fibers from the vastus 
lateralis, nor was there a correlation between  
temporary spikes in IGF-1 and growth of slow and 
fast-twitch fibers from the vastus lateralis.
However, there was a weak correlation between 
temporary spikes in growth hormone and slow and  
fast-twitch fiber growth, but again 
these relationships were very weak.  
There was also a weak correlation between cortisol 
temporary spikes and fast-twitch fiber growth,  
but not slow-twitch fiber growth.
It's worth mentioning cortisol is actually 
catabolic, it increases muscle protein breakdown  
and as such, is considered counteractive 
to hypertrophy, so this relationship  
(again, which was weak) between cortisol 
spikes and fast-twitch fiber growth does  
not readily make much sense, and perhaps 
may be best interpreted as a coincidence.
Another study by Fink et al. found after 20 
men (untrained at least in the last 2 years  
leading up to the study) trained a variety of arm 
exercises each for 3 sets with 8-20 repetitions  
and between 30 seconds and 3 minutes of rest 
between sets, there was no correlation between  
temporary spikes in growth hormone (measured 
during a training session in the second week)  
and increases in arm cross-sectional area. No 
other hormones were assessed in this study.
Thirdly, Mitchell et al. found after 
23 men (untrained at least in the year  
leading up to the study) trained a range of 
exercises each for 2-4 sets with 6-12 reps,  
using 60-120 seconds of rest between sets 
for four times per week for 16 weeks,  
there was no relationship between any temporary 
spikes in the main anabolic hormones evoked via an  
acute training loading protocol (which occurred 
during the first and last weeks of training)  
and growth of slow and fast-twitch 
muscle fibers from the vastus lateralis.
Finally, Morton et al. found after 49 men (with 
at least 2 years of training experience) trained  
a range of exercises for 3 sets of 8-25 reps 
to failure 4 times per week for 12 weeks,  
there was no relationship between all temporary 
spikes in the anabolic hormones evoked via an  
acute training loading protocol (which 
occurred before and after the training  
period) and growth of slow and fast-twitch 
muscle fibers from the vastus lateralis.
So in total, the majority of the 
current literature fails to find  
a correlation between temporary spikes evoked 
via training and long-term muscle hypertrophy.
Now, this is only correlational data, and it 
still does not necessarily inform us how a  
training with a program that generates significant 
temporary spikes in anabolic hormones compares to  
a program that generates lesser (if any) spikes in 
anabolic hormones for direct muscle hypertrophy.
The best way to assess this is to directly analyze 
the current literature that has looked at this.
Quite interestingly, one study by Ronnestad et 
al. indicates long-term muscle hypertrophy may  
be enhanced with a program that generates 
high temporary spikes in anabolic hormones.
11 previously untrained men had one arm 
assigned to a low hormone condition and their  
other arm assigned to a high hormone condition.
Both arms were trained 
twice per week for 12 weeks.
Each session, the low hormone arm trained the 
biceps curl, hammer curl, and reverse curl each  
for 2 sets with a 6-10 rep-max load. This training 
session, due to involving low amounts of muscle  
mass, failed to evoke any significant temporary 
spikes in testosterone or growth hormone.
The high hormone arm, each session, performed 
exactly what the low hormone arm did,  
but before doing so, performed 
the leg press, leg extension,  
and leg curl each for 3 sets with a 10 rep-max 
load using 60-90 seconds of rest between sets.  
Due to these additional leg exercises which 
involve large amounts of muscle mass, as well  
as the short rest intervals between sets of them, 
this lower-body training generated significant  
spikes in testosterone and growth hormone during 
the subsequent biceps exercises, with the growth  
hormone spike remaining further elevated 
after the completion of the biceps exercises.
By the end of the study, increases 
in cross-sectional area of the elbow  
flexors at two proximal sites were 
similar between both conditions,  
but at two distal sites, increases 
were greater for the high hormone arm.
Therefore, this data suggests preceding biceps 
exercises with lower body training that evokes  
spikes in testosterone and growth hormone may 
ultimately enhance overall biceps hypertrophy.
This is quite fascinating, however,  
a different study by West et al. 
somewhat conflicts with these findings.
12 previously untrained men 
had one arm assigned to a low  
hormone condition and their other arm 
assigned to a high hormone condition.
Both arms were trained one to 
two times per week for 15 weeks.
Each session, the low hormone arm performed an 
arm curl (they weren't specific on which arm  
curl) for 3-4 sets of 8-12 repetitions with a 95% 
10 rep-max load. Due to the low amounts of muscle  
mass trained, this exercise failed to temporarily 
spike free testosterone, growth hormone, or IGF-1.
The high hormone arm, each session, performed 
exactly what the low hormone arm did,  
but thereafter performed 5 sets 
of 10 repetitions on the leg press  
and 3 sets of 10 repetitions on a 
leg extension/leg curl superset,  
both were performed with a 95% 10 rep-max load. 
Due to these lower body exercises performed after,  
this session successfully provoked spikes 
in testosterone, growth hormone, and IGF-1.
Despite this, by the end of the study, 
increases in cross-sectional area of the  
elbow flexors at all measured regions 
were similar between both conditions.  
Moreover, increases in slow-twitch and 
fast-twitch fiber cross-sectional area  
from the elbow flexors were also 
similar between both conditions.
What could explain the conflicting findings 
between the West and Ronnestad studies?
The West study had the high hormone condition 
perform the lower body exercises that evoked  
spikes in anabolic hormones after the biceps 
exercise, whereas the Ronnestad study had  
the high hormone condition perform the lower 
body exercises before the biceps exercises.
Perhaps performing the lower body exercises 
that generate spikes in anabolic hormones  
prior to the biceps exercises, due 
to resulting in you performing the  
biceps exercises under elevated 
anabolic hormone concentrations,  
somehow potentiates long-term biceps 
hypertrophy via some mechanism.
One such mechanism might relate to enhanced 
testosterone and androgen receptor content.
More precisely, creating an elevated anabolic 
environment via performing lower body exercises  
prior to biceps training may not only elevate 
circulating testosterone concentrations  
but also androgen receptor 
content within the biceps itself.  
Such events would presumably enhance 
the likelihood testosterone can bind to  
androgen receptors to thereafter provoke 
an increase in muscle protein synthesis.
I speculate this because one study by 
Spiering et al. found that performing  
a range of compound upper body exercises 
each for 4 sets with a 10 rep-max load  
(which temporarily spiked testosterone) before 
performing 5 sets with a 5 rep-max load on  
a knee extension and flexion dynamometer 
increased androgen receptor content within  
the vastus lateralis 180 minutes after 
exercise. This was in contrast to only  
performing 5 sets with a 5 rep-max load on 
the knee extension and flexion dynamometer,  
which failed to spike testosterone and androgen 
receptor content within the vastus lateralis.
Stated another way, performing exercises that 
spike anabolic hormones before training a certain  
muscle may ultimately increase the androgen 
receptor content within that certain muscle.
Having said all of this, some data challenges 
these aforementioned ideas and results.
There exist studies finding 
that despite a training  
protocol evoking temporary spikes in testosterone,  
androgen receptor content actually downregulates 
in the hours after (that is, it decreases).
Additionally, if spiking anabolic 
hormones prior to training a muscle  
enhanced its hypertrophy long-term, we 
would expect training compound exercises,  
due to spiking anabolic hormones as they 
involve large amounts of muscle mass,  
prior to single-joint biceps and triceps exercises 
to enhance biceps and triceps hypertrophy.
However, this does not appear to be the case.
Three studies have found biceps and/or 
triceps hypertrophy was similar regardless  
of if compound or biceps and triceps isolation 
exercises were performed first in a session.  
If anything, the results of these studies 
might favor performing the biceps and triceps  
isolation exercises first, therefore 
conflicting with the Ronnestad study.
On the basis of this data, I believe we cannot be 
certain the results of the Ronnestad study can be  
truly confirmed, the results might just be random 
and related to the small sample size of the study.
Moving forward, two further areas of 
the literature indicate a program that  
evokes higher spikes in anabolic hormones 
does not confer additional hypertrophy.
Firstly, Schwanbeck et al. found in men, 
performing free weight squats and bench  
presses temporarily spiked free testosterone more 
than smith machines squats and bench presses.  
Yet, after an 8 week training period, a 
free weight program (including the free  
weight squat and bench press) produced similar 
increases in quadriceps and biceps thickness to  
an exclusive machine program (that included 
the smith machine squat and bench press).
Secondly, as we noted much earlier in this video, 
using shorter rest intervals between sets (90  
seconds or less) tends to evoke greater spikes in 
anabolic hormones (particularly growth hormone)  
compared to training with longer 
rest intervals (2.5 minutes or more).  
However, as we've thoroughly described in 
our complete guide to rest intervals video,  
it seems with compound exercises and all 
other training variables equivalent, resting  
for 2.5 minutes or more generates more muscle 
hypertrophy than resting for 90 seconds or less.
Therefore, this free weight vs machine literature, 
as well as the rest interval literature,  
together further support the idea that 
programs that evoke higher temporary spikes  
in anabolic hormones do not necessarily 
produce greater long-term hypertrophy.
Combining all of the current 
evidence assessed thus far,  
and its apparent training in a way designed to 
maximally spike anabolic hormones is unnecessary.
Not only are there weak (virtually non-existent) 
correlations between the magnitude of temporary  
spikes in anabolic hormones and muscle 
hypertrophy, but programs that generate  
higher temporary spikes in anabolic hormones 
do not appear to enhance muscle hypertrophy.
Why might this be?
The earlier mechanisms we outlined, that 
spikes in anabolic hormones could increase the  
likelihood of hormone-receptor interactions that 
culminate in increased muscle protein synthesis,  
seemed pretty logical. But evidently, 
this seems to not be occurring in reality.
There are a few reasons I can think of 
that could potentially resolve this.
Firstly, receptor content could 
just downregulate (that is,  
decrease in number) despite spikes in anabolic 
hormones, thereby counteracting the increase in  
anabolic hormones and making it no more likely 
hormone receptor interactions would be enhanced.  
Supporting this, and as I noted earlier 
already, there's evidence despite training  
evoking a spike in testosterone, 
androgen receptor content decreased.
Secondly, it's important to recognize these 
temporary spikes in anabolic hormones are  
typically not very substantial, and it's 
quite possible these transient elevations  
are just too insignificant to influence muscle 
hypertrophy. Of course, we know that chronic  
supraphysiological elevations of anabolic hormones 
(achieved via exogenous administration, that is,  
you use steroids), very powerfully enhance muscle 
hypertrophy. Yet, the very transient elevations  
achieved via training naturally generally 
do not reach supraphysiological levels.
Thirdly, it's quite plausible 
the temporary spikes in anabolic  
hormones may just simply be a response to the 
build of metabolites (like lactate) within a  
muscle and/or be more so oriented towards 
mobilizing fuel for muscle contraction,  
rather than promoting an increase in 
muscle protein synthesis post-exercise.
At this time, I don't believe we have 
enough evidence to comment on which of  
these three reasons (if any) explains the 
current observations of the literature.
Nonetheless, at the end of the day, 
I think everything outlined in this  
video more or less indirectly 
demonstrates that for natural  
individuals that are within the normal 
physiological anabolic hormones ranges,  
local factors within the muscle are more important 
for muscle hypertrophy than any systemic factors.
What I mean by this is training sufficiently 
to stimulate the full spectrum of muscle fibers  
(which would enable mechanosensitive 
proteins within the fibers to detect  
tension and subsequently initiate a signaling 
cascade the results in an increase in muscle  
protein synthesis), and then fuelling your 
muscles correctly via sufficient caloric  
and protein intake (depending of course 
on your goals) is far more important for  
muscle hypertrophy than any transient spike 
in systemic anabolic hormone concentrations.
As always, thank you for watching. 
I truly hope you found the video  
interesting and informative in some way!