Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here with a Muscle
In Minutes Q&A where I give quick, to the
point answers to your fitness questions.
So today’s topic is actually a female fitness
question, and it might sound like kind of
weird one for me to post but it’s actually
a very common question that I get asked, and
that is, does chest training affect breast
size in women.
Now I know that a lot of women out there actually
shy away from chest training because they're
afraid that it’s going to make their breasts
smaller, so what’s the real truth here.
Well the short and very simple answer is that
chest training in and of itself will actually,
if anything, make a woman’s breasts slightly
more prominent, because it builds up the pectoral
muscle underneath which will basically push
them a little bit further out.
So the difference will usually be pretty moderate,
but it will help a bit in that area.
The thing that causes the breasts to actually
become smaller is simply a results of lowering
your overall body fat percentage and that’s
because a good portion of a woman’s breasts
are just comprised of basic body fat, and
so when you focus on losing body fat as a
whole, you’re going to inevitably lose some
fat from that area as well.
So that’s really basically all there is
to it.
Working out your chest with bench presses
and dumbbell presses and fly movements is
really just training the pectoral muscle underneath,
and since you can’t actually spot reduce
body fat from specific areas of your body,
those exercises don’t actually burn fat
off of your chest area, again it’s just
training the muscle underneath.
So yes, if you are a female who is following
a fat loss program, then your breasts may
shrink a bit, though this effect will vary
from person to person, again, simply because
of the fact that you’re lowering your overall
body fat percentage, but it really has nothing
to do with the fact that you’re performing
chest exercises.
So if you’re a woman and if you’re serious
about your fitness training program and you're
serious about developing a complete and well-rounded
physique both in terms of your appearance
and in terms of overall functional strength,
then chest training should be treated with
the same level of focus as you'd give to any
other muscle group.
It’s not going to make your breasts smaller,
and if anything it will actually have the
opposite effect.
So thanks for watching this video, make sure
to like, comment and subscribe if you found
the information helpful, you can also check
out my complete step by step Body Transformation
Blueprint System by clicking the icon at the
top of the video or using the link in the
description box below, and also make sure
to check out my official website over at SeanNal.com
to stay up to date on all of my latest content.
Talk to you again soon.