What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
And in this video today I want to explain
the relationship between alcohol and fatloss,
and go over what the potential problem with
drinking is and what it isn't when it comes
to leaning down because there seems to be
a lot of misunderstanding on this topic.
Now before I jump into it, if you enjoyed
this video make sure to hit the subscribe
button below to stay in the loop on all of
my future content.
And click the little bell symbol as well and
that way you'll be notified whenever a new
video is available so that you don't miss
out on anything.
So what the problem isn't when it comes to
alcohol and fatloss is the alcohol itself.
Meaning there's nothing inherently fattening
about alcohol and it is possible to consume
some alcohol as part of your diet and still
lose fat consistently just as much fat as
you would otherwise as long as you exercise
some reasonable moderation and you track the
calories.
Just like there's nothing inherently fattening
about eating a slice of pizza or having a
couple cookies, how alcohol actually affects
your results all depends on how it fits into
the overall picture as a whole.
In order to lose fat you need to maintain
a calorie deficit.
Alcohol contains calories and if you track
those calories as part of your diet just like
if you track the calories from piece of pizza
or a cookie you can still maintain a nett
deficit, get in all of your other macro and
micro nutrient needs and you can still lose
fat while having a few drinks here and there.
So as long as you don't go overboard, meaning
you're having no more than the equivalent
of about one to two drinks per day for a male
about half that amount for a female, or you're
going out and having a higher number of drinks
but doing it less frequently, like having
a night out with your buddies and drinking
a bit more heavily but just doing it every
now and then, alcohol itself is not going
to be a problem from a pure fat burning or
muscle building perspective.
There's a lot of myths on this floating around
but no, it won't suppress testosterone to
any serious degree unless you consume a huge
amount and even then the effect is temporary.
It won't reduce protein synthesis to any serious
degree and it won't affect recovery either
unless you're doing very high volume training
or endurance training.
And again, you'd have to be drinking a fairly
heavy amount for that to be a problem.
And I did a detailed video on this last year
that I'll link below, and I'll also link some
studies below on this as well.
So, alcohol itself tracked and in moderation
is not going to significantly negatively impact
fatloss.
However, where drinking can become a real
problem and where it can legitimately throw
your fatloss program and your physique off
course is from the behavioral changes that
it can produce which then carry over to your
program as a whole.
Meaning, maybe you go out drinking and you
do take the calories into account and it all
fits into your intake for the day.
No problem there, but what do you end up eating
at the end of the night, for example.
Are you really going home and eating you know
a chicken breasts with sweet potato or are
you sitting at McDonald's at 03:00 A.M.
eating a 20-piece Chicken McNugget meal with
five sweet and sour sauces and a large fries.
Big difference there.
You're probably also not going to get the
best sleep in the world.
Maybe you have a bit of a hangover.
So how does that affect your motivation the
next day?
Are you going to say, “Okay, that was a
fun night time to get back on track let's
get back into the gym get back on track with
my diet.”
Or are you going to say, “Screw it.
I already messed up last night so I'm just
going to relax on the couch and watch Netflix
and order some pizza.”
And if that happens, how is that going to
affect your training?
Are you now going to feel discouraged and
skip a workout or skip a cardio session?
Is your diet going to get even worse?
And if those things happen how does it affect
you moving forward?
When friends ask you to go out drinking again
the next weekend are you going to say, “No,
I drank last week I'm going to take it easy
and stay in.”
Or are you going to give in and go ahead and
repeat that same process again.
Little fluctuations in calorie intake or a
missed workout here and there are not going
to be a big deal but if it's happening too
frequently it obviously will add up.
And since fatloss primarily comes down to
overall nett energy balance, burning more
calories than you consume in the overall picture,
enough little spikes and calorie intake and
enough missed workouts and your deficit can
end up being significantly cut down or erased
altogether.
Or you could even end up in a surplus and
start gaining fat.
So that, as I see it, is the real potential
problem with alcohol and fatloss or even alcohol
and muscle growth.
In a vacuum with all the variables controlled,
moderate alcohol consumption is not going
to be an issue.
But for certain people it's the spillover
effect.
That's what you really have to worry about.
There's no question that drinking lowers your
willpower and makes things harder to resist.
And if you're somebody who struggles with
willpower in the first place, when it comes
to food, then that could be a legitimate issue
for you.
Just like how some people can eat one doughnut
and enjoy it and move on without a problem,
for other people it can be a trigger food
where one doughnut leads to two doughnuts
which leads to five and so on.
A doughnut is not inherently fattening in
and off itself it's the quantity of donuts
and how those donuts end up affecting the
overall picture.
So if you're serious about leaning down and
achieving a great physique, you have to know
yourself, okay.
Everybody is different and you have to be
honest with yourself and say, “Can I go
out and drink socially and have, maybe, three
or four drinks, take the calories into account
and then call it a night and carry on as usual.”
Or “Does three or four drinks usually spiral
out of control for me?”
Or, “Yeah, I want to go out one night have
more of, like, a party night, drink a larger
amount, can I have that one big night and
just let loose and have my calories temporarily
spike up a little bit and then get right back
on track?
Or, “Is that big night likely going to affect
me negatively moving forward.”
Am I going to be tired and eat more the next
day or in the next several days?
Am I going to skip workout to lose motivation,
et cetera.
If you know that you can drink in moderation
without any issue then you're probably fine.
And you can strike a good healthy balance
for yourself there.
Or if you have maybe more of an addictive
personality or you struggle with willpower,
especially when it comes to food, maybe you
decide that abstaining altogether at least
for the time being while you focus on your
fitness program is the better choice.
Or maybe you do have a drink or two here and
there but only in certain settings, meaning
that you avoid those typical party scenarios
where people are drinking more heavily and
you just stick to more casual settings like
a restaurant or a small gathering or something
like that.
Now, what are some things you can do to minimize
alcohols spillover effects?
I'll give you a few tips here before closing
the video out.
Number one, if you're drinking more heavily
then don't do it the night before a workout
since you'll have a higher chance of skipping
and if you do train then your performance
likely won't be as good.
That'll give you a day to recover, or maybe
two days to recover, and to get your motivation
back and to hit the gym when you're feeling
fresh again.
Or at the very least try to schedule your
easiest workout on that day rather than the
more challenging ones.
Secondly, save up some calories during the
day for later on in the night.
You probably don't want to be drinking on
a completely empty stomach but at least earlier
on the day you can eat a little bit lighter,
because that'll create a bit of a calorie
buffer so that if you do have a higher calorie
meal later on the effect it won't be as significant
overall.
Third, have a set limit in mind for how many
drinks you're going to have that night before
you start drinking.
It doesn't guarantee that you're going to
stick to it, obviously, but it's something
that I personally find really helpful because
I'll end up spacing my drinks out a bit further
rather than just getting caught up in it and
letting things get a bit out of control.
Fourth, one tip you can try is to have a pre-prepared
meal ready for you at home for later on.
So if you know that there's a meal ready for
you when you get back and all you have to
do is just pop it in the microwave, that'll
lessen the chance that you will end up binging
on fast food or some other really high-calorie
takeout food at the end of the night.
And fifth is to rehydrate.
Most people don't need to be told this, but
alcohol is very dehydrating and replenishing
those fluids after you drink will go a long
way in minimizing any potential hangover which
will also minimize the chances that you'll
fall off track with your nutrition and your
training.
The better you feel after a night of drinking
the better off you're going to be in terms
of your fitness program and vice versa, and
if besides drinking water there are other
things you know that personally help in terms
of reducing your hangover, have the discipline
to do those things before going to bed.
So bottom line here guys, alcohol itself is
not a problem when consumed in moderation.
It doesn't ruin fatloss in and of itself.
You can drink socially in moderation and still
lose fat and achieve a great physique.
But what can ruin fatloss is how the alcohol
affects the overall picture.
So, know yourself and know what your strengths
and your weaknesses are and structure your
training and diet and your potential alcohol
consumption based around that if you truly
want to succeed at this and get into the shape
you're after.
So, I hope this was helpful for you.
Feel free to share the video if it was.
You can hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe as well.
If you want to check out my complete step-by-step
Body Transformation Blueprint system that
shows you how to maximize your muscle building
and fat burning results, including easy-to-follow
workouts and meal plans supplement guides
and one-on-one coaching, then you can click
the little icon here.
Or you can visit www.BTBluePrint.com, the
link for that is in the description box.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And make sure to follow me on Instagram and
Facebook as well if you aren't already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.