Hey, what’s going on guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com, BodyTransformationTruth.com
and enough people have asked me about it.
So, here it is marijuana and bodybuilding.
Does smoking pot affect muscle growth or fat
loss?
Now, two things first before I continue.
Number one; this video is specifically addressing
the effects of marijuana consumption on building
muscle or burning fat.
So, is there any direct connection between
the two?
Whatever other negative or positive effects
that it might have on someone’s health,
that’s not the topic here.
That’s a massive subject.
And you can research on your own to weigh
out the benefits and drawbacks for yourself.
And secondly, this is a completely unbiased
video where I’m just presenting the facts
that are available as I see them.
I’m not advocating smoking pot or not smoking
pot.
I could care less whether you do it or not.
It’s totally your choice.
So, I’m going to attempt -- keyword attempt
to keep this concise.
That usually doesn’t happen, but let’s
try.
So, the typical response that you’ll usually
get when it comes to the issue of marijuana
and bodybuilding is usually something along
the lines of, you know, if you smoke weed,
then, you’ll just end up lazy and unmotivated.
You’ll skip workouts, you won’t train
intensely, you’ll get the munchies and over
eat, you won’t be able to focus, so on and
so forth.
And I personally think that’s just kind
of a lazy almost cliché answer at this point,
because it doesn’t say anything at all about
the dosage and the frequency involved, individual
differences that might come into play or what
the actual research says on the issue.
So when it comes to weed and bodybuilding,
the main issues of concern are basically hormonal.
So, the way that it affects levels of testosterone,
growth hormone and estrogen.
And I have reviewed the research that is available.
And as far as I can tell, there are no studies,
currently, that show that moderate marijuana
use has a significant long-term effect on
those hormones that would cause you to gain
muscle or burn fat less effectively.
At least not to a degree that would be noticeable.
So, with testosterone, you basically see small
short-term decreases after smoking, which
then go back to baseline fairly quickly afterwards.
And even when test levels do drop, they still
stay within the normal range.
Heavy use might be a different story.
But again, the studies are still mixed.
Some show lower levels, but again, still within
the normal range.
And other show no real difference at all.
And again, remember that the simple act of
increasing or decreasing testosterone levels
that really doesn’t say anything on its
own, because in terms of it affecting muscle
growth, those levels have to be raised or
lowered, and to a significant enough degree
and then sustained over prolonged period in
order for it to really matter.
So, after testosterone, you have growth hormone.
In this area, you only see decreases when
very large doses of pure THC are given.
And even then the decrease is pretty minor
and it’s temporary.
And one study even showed an increase in growth
hormone.
And when it comes to estrogen, again, mixed
results.
I’m not going to go into all the details
here.
Some in-vitro research.
So, basically test tube studies that were
done on rat cells.
Those have shown an estrogen lowering effect.
But then the research that was done on live
rats, couldn’t replicate it.
And research -- some research has shown a
negative effect, but only at very high doses.
And I will provide some references in the
description box below, if you do want to check
them out.
So, based on the studies that I’ve seen
as well as just general anecdotal evidence,
I personally can’t see any good reason to
tell you that moderate use of marijuana would
slow down your rate of muscle growth or a
fat loss.
And even if it did, it probably would be very
minor and you probably wouldn’t even notice
it.
Now, that obviously assumes that your overall
training and your diet remain exactly the
same.
If marijuana use causes behavioral changes,
which is then carry over to your bodybuilding
program, that’s obviously a different story.
For example, if it causes you to significantly
over eat on a consistent basis, because of
increases in appetite, then of course, that’s
going to have consequences when it comes to
fat gain.
Or if you consume it close to your training
sessions, and you find that it lowers your
workout quality or either you end up skipping
all together, obviously, that’s not a good
thing either.
But again, those are behavioral changes that
are within your control.
And they aren’t a direct result of marijuana
itself, physically lowering your body’s
muscle building or fat burning capability.
Now, what about frequent heavy use?
My stance there is just that I don’t see
enough information for me to comfortably say
that that’s not going to have any effect.
It very well might not have an effect, but
I just don’t know for sure.
So, if you’re someone who is using it daily
or multiple times a week, again, it might
be totally fine.
I don’t know.
But I would say to just take the facts that
I’ve given into consideration.
Do some research on your own.
And then, weigh it off against how it affects
you personally, and what you’re fitness
goals are and then just decide for yourself.
As for moderate use, so maybe once a week
or less, again, I’m not advocating that
you smoke or don’t smoke pot, but from a
pure bodybuilding perspective, I really can’t
see it being a problem.
It’s possible that there are other health
reasons why you shouldn’t smoke it.
But that’s beyond the scope of this video,
and it’s something that you’ll just have
to research and decide for yourself.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope that was an unbiased evidence-based
answer to the question.
I know that some people do get flustered by
this topic.
But it’s 2015, alcohol is a drug, the stuff
in your pre-workout is a drug.
There are a lot more serious things to worry
about in my opinion, than if someone smokes
a bit of pot here and there, just my opinion.
Feel free to share the video.
If you enjoyed it, hit the like button, comment
and subscribe.
If you want to check out my complete step-by-step
body transformation blueprint system that
shows you how to maximize your muscle-building
and your fat-burning results, including easy
to follow workouts, meal plans and supplement
guides, then you can click here or you can
visit BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link is in the description box.
And my official website is Seannal.com, where
you’ll find plenty of other free tips and
useful information.
Talk to you guys again soon.