What’s going on, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNeal.com - www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and the question of how to lose face fat might
seem like sort of weird topic to a lot of
you, but the truth is that this is something
that I do get asked quite often and it did
come in the Q&A video that I did a while back.
So I wanted to do a really quick video here
answering this.
It’s obviously a beginner question but a
lot of people do message me saying that they
have bloating in their face or that they tend
to store fat there and I just want to know
how to get rid of it and get a more visible
jaw line and cheekbones, just slim down their
faces in general.
The answer to this is dead simple; No, face
work out is not the answer.
[video] I’m going to demonstrate this and
then you’ll do it along with me.
Watch.
Wow, bringing blood to the face and oxigenating
the blood is the most cleansing thing you
can do [video]
If you want to lose face fat, all it really
comes down to is just an issue of basic total
body fat loss in general by maintaining a
net calorie deposit overtime and lowering
your overall body fat percentage.
There’s no way to specifically target your
face fat over any other fat on your body,
just like specifically target belly fat or
specifically target thigh fat or anything
else.
The only way to lose fat from one specific
area of your body is to lose fat from your
entire body as a whole and that’s done through
proper training and proper nutrition.
The way in which your body breaks down that
fat from different areas is determined by
genetics, but overtime you will lose fat from
everywhere and that’s include your face.
And luckily a lot of people do find that when
they begin a fat loss program, changes in
their facial area are one of the first things
that they notice.
And this happens both through losing a bit
of actual fat and also through reducing water
retention because once you get on to a proper
nutrition plan with fewer calories and fewer
carbs and a higher water intake that’s going
to have a natural flushing effect and you’ll
probably lose a few pounds of water weight
really quickly just from that alone and some
of it will come of your face.
So that’s really all there is to it.
I’m not going to go into details of proper
training and nutrition here because that’s
a very broad topic and I have over three hundred
videos on this channel discussing it.
I have tons of articles on my blog over at
www.SeanNal.com and if you just want everything
laid out in step-by-step detail in one place
then you can download my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by using the
link in the description box.
But in any case if you want to slim down your
face or any one particular area of your body,
the only way to do that is by lowering your
overall body fat percentage in general.
And there’s no specific technique that you
can use to just hone in one particular area.
So thanks for watching.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
Feel free to like, comment and subscribe and
the official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
and you can find tons of free information
there to get going with your fat loss program
if you’re just starting out.
So thanks for watching and I’ll see you
in the next video.