What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com - www.RealScienceAthletics.com,
and in today's video is something a little
different.
I want to go back and talk about the time
that I got really fat.
I managed to dirty bulk my way up to 227 pounds
at five foot nine.
Not actually realizing at the time just how
much fat I had gained or realizing how far
off course I actually was with the approach
that I was taking.
So this was about ten years ago, I was 22
years old, during my later years in high school
I walked around at about between 185 to 190
pounds.
I wasn't super lean but my body fat was still
pretty reasonable, somewhere around the mid-teens,
and I was pretty strong and muscular at the
time and I took my training really seriously
back then.
And then once high school was over, I had
my online business going, I was working for
myself I had a lot more free time available,
and so I decided that it was time to really
push things to the next level with my training
and put on some serious sights and basically
just get as huge as I possibly could.
Now, unfortunately the time like a lot of
lifters out there, I just didn't have a real
understanding or a real appreciation for the
true genetic limits of muscle growth for natural
lifters.
And also the fact that the longer you've been
training, the slower the muscle gains are
gonna come.
And at that point I was probably already carrying
you know 85 to 90% of the total muscle mass
that my body was capable of building naturally,
meaning that just to gain even one or two
pounds of extra muscle would probably take
several months up to a year or more of hard
focus training, but again, I just didn't know
it at the time.
So I did what a high percentage of misguided
bodybuilding trainees do, which is to basically
just cram as much food into my face as I possibly
could, as much as my stomach could handle.
I remember my breakfast was this huge homemade
shake that I drink out of a big measuring
cup.
I remember it was skim milk with two scoops
of protein powder, a banana oatmeal, yogurt,
not the plain yogurt but the ones that are
flavored and loaded with tons of sugar, then
two big scoops of peanut butter, flaxseed
oil, olive oil, and sometimes I had ice cream
to it, too.
So that shake was easily twelve hundred calories
or more, might have that same shake both in
the morning and at night before bed, and then
during the day I'd have to solid food meals
which were also pretty high-calorie, and then
in between the two solid meals might also
have a weight gainer shake.
I never tracked calories back then, but it
was probably somewhere between, I'd say 4,500
to 5,000 calories a day on average, somewhere
around there, which for me is a crazy amount,
especially considering that I don't actually
have that big of an appetite.
And then on top of that I was out of high
school now, so I wasn't playing sports regularly
like I used to, no daily gym classes and I
was working really hard on my online business,
so I'd spend most of the day just sitting
at the desk or on the couch at home.
So I was basically doing zero cardio on top
of all of this.
The problem with dirty bulking though, is
that once you cross a certain body fat threshold
and your muscle definition is mostly covered
up, you really can't directly see whether
what you're gaining is actually lean muscle
or fat, because all you really see is just
your overall body size in general just getting
bigger and bigger, and if you don't understand
the basic math in terms of realistic muscle
growth rates for a natural and your strength
in the gym is also going up consistently you
just assume you're packing on a bunch of muscle,
when in reality the majority of it is fat.
So to make a long story short, I kept up with
this ridiculous approach, I kept training
hard and essentially forced feeding myself
like a farm animal, I can't even remember
how long this went on for, but the scale just
kept going up steadily, 205, 210, 220, just
under 230, and I just figured, Hey, man this
is great, I'm bigger than ever, I'm stronger
than ever, I'm killing it, I've made great
progress, let's do a quick cut now and I'll
be in my best shape ever.
And again, because like a lot of lifters out
there, the muscle gain/fat gain ratios in
my mind we're just way out of whack in terms
of what is actually realistically attainable.
I figured if I just draw up, maybe, 15 pounds
of fat then I'd be sitting there at a lean
and muscular 210 to 215 pounds.
So I took some before pictures which are the
ones that I showed earlier here, here's another
awesome one for you to enjoy looking very
attractive there, and after I took those pictures
that was kind of my first inkling that maybe
I was a bit fatter than I realized, maybe
I had gone a little overboard.
This was back before smart phones.
This was like 2008 and I had one of those
crappy little flip phones I couldn't take
pictures, so I wasn't taking regular pictures
of myself during my bulking phase because
I just couldn't be bothered to pull up my
digital camera and take a bunch of pictures.
So I was pretty much just going by the mirror
all the way through.
And the thing is that when you see yourself
every single day in the mirror you just get
used to your reflection and then because the
changes in size are so gradual, it's just
really easy to not realize how much you've
actually changed over time.
But I remember I took those pictures, had
a look and I was, like, okay, yeah, I'm definitely
carrying some pretty decent fat here.
This is more than I realized, but let's just
do this cut and let's see what happens, and
this is kind of where the rude awakening comes
in for guys who dirty bulk and that's where
you start cutting and you're losing fat consistently
and you've dropped an amount of fat that you
thought would make a big difference to your
physique, but yet no abs or muscle definition
of any kind is anywhere to be found.
So that's what happened to me, I got down
to 220 still fat, got down to 210 still fat,
200 still pretty fat, and it wasn't until
I got back to my normal previous weights down
toward about the 190 range that the leanness
slowly started to come back, and at that point
it just hit me that all throughout that bulking
process I had really only gained a very small
amount of actual muscle despite all the effort
I had put in.
All the hard training all, the food I had
stuff myself with to get to 227, and all the
months of dieting to get back down again.
And given all of my previous training experience
and how much muscle I was already carrying
before I started it, it really shouldn't have
been a surprise, but I just didn't know any
better at the time.
And this is why I've made several videos in
the past and talked many times before about
why dirty bulking is generally just a bad
idea for most natural lifters.
And that's because your body can only make
use of so many calories in a given day and
you can only gain a pretty limited amount
of muscle during any given week, or any given
month, and any calories you take in beyond
that maximum point are just gonna end up as
body fat.
For a beginner you're probably looking at
around 300 calorie daily surplus for optimal
results, and about two pounds of overall weight
gain per month, three at the very most, and
then the rate of weight gain should slow down
by about half for every consecutive year of
proper training after the first.
And the total size of your calorie surplus
should also go down over time as well since
you aren't going to be able to build muscle
at the same rate the more experience that
you’d gain.
So maintaining a moderate controlled surplus
and focusing on making slower, leaner gains
over the long term is generally the best approach,
because you'll just look and feel better throughout
the entire process, you'll still build muscle
at or near your maximum potential, and it
also means less time spent cutting later on,
which is a big plus, since dieting is obviously
no fun, and because it will also allow you
to spend more time focusing on muscle gain
rather than having to shift your focus onto
dropping body fat that you didn't even need
to gain in the first place.
So, just use my past experience as a reminder.
And on the plus side at least the mistakes
that I made with dirty bulking can hopefully
help some people out there avoid going down
the same route.
I know it's tempting once you get into “muscle
building mode” that you just want to go
all out with it, and it also makes it easier
to justify overeating because you can just
tell yourself that you need all those extra
calories to make the gains, but it's just
not the reality because you really don't need
a huge surplus to maximize your muscle growth
over any given date anyway.
And if you remain disciplined enough to stay
within a healthy body fat percentage year-round,
I wouldn't recommend bulking past probably
18 to 20% as a maximum cap for males, then
you're gonna thank yourself later on since
you won't have to do that long drawn-out cutting
phase in order to lean back down.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope this story and this advice was helpful.
If you do want to learn all the details behind
mapping out a proper training and nutrition
program so that you can maximize your muscle
gains while staying lean at the same time,
then you can check out my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking up at the top of the
screen or by visiting www.BTBluePrint.com,
that covers everything in a step-by-step format
including fully structured training routines,
meal plans and supplement guides.
For those who are new to the channel my brand
new science-based pre-workout fish oil and
multivitamin are also now available over at
www.RealScienceAthletics.com, the link for
that is in the description box.
And make sure to hit that like button, leave
a comment and subscribe below if you haven't
already, in order to stay up-to-date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see in the next one.