Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, here of EliteImpactLabs.com,
with another Muscle in Minutes Q&A where I
answer your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less.
So, today's question comes from Eric.
And he wants to know how to figure out whether
he should bulk or cut as a starting point
for his overall fitness program.
Now, this is a very, very common question
that I get asked.
And the reality is that there's no single
answer here that's going to apply to everybody,
because it's going to depend on a variety
of factors.
It's going to depend on your ultimate fitness
goals.
So how big or how lean you ultimately want
to be.
It's going to depend on your current body
fat percentage.
And it's going to depend on how much body
fat you're alternately comfortable carrying.
So, the first thing I should mention is that
if you're asking this question in the first
place, there's a very good chance that you
need to cut.
You know, if you're -- if you're ultimate
goal is to gain muscle, and you're already
relatively lean, then you would just start
off gaining muscle, you wouldn't even ask
the question.
So, if you're asking this question, there's
a decent chance that you need to start off
with the fat loss phase.
Now, I'll give you a very general guideline.
If your ultimate goal is a muscular and strong
body, then I would recommend that you be at
least 12% body fat before you embark on a
muscle building phase.
The very important thing to keep in mind is
that any time you try to add a significant
amount of muscle to your body, you're also
going to gain some fat with it.
This is an inevitable byproduct of a calorie
surplus which is a mandatory prerequisite
for muscle growth.
There's just no way to divert a 100% of those
calories to your muscle tissue.
You're always going to gain some fat with
it.
So, if you're body fat is relatively high
to begin with, say, you're 16% percent right
now.
And then you go and commit to six months or
a year of bulking, by the time that bulking
phase is over, you're going to be carrying
a pretty excessive amount of body fat.
So, as a general guideline, look to be about
12% body fat before you start a bulking phase,
12% body fat is, you know, you certainly don't
have a ripped six pack, but you probably have
what you describe as a blurry four pack, where
basically if you flex, you can see your abs.
And you have, you know, a reasonable amount
of definition, but nothing too serious.
So, if you are above 12% body fat, start with
the cutting phase.
And if you are 12% or lower, and you want
to build muscle, then start with the bulking
phase.
So, that's your question answered.
I hope that was a useful to you.
If you have a question that you would like
answered, just head over to the Elite Impact
Labs Facebook page using the link in the description
box, you can post your question there.
And I'll either answer it on the page or make
a video response just like this one.
So, I hope you found this video lesson here
useful.
If you did, please make sure to hit the like
button, leave a comment, and subscribe to
stay up-to-date on future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan using the link in the description
box.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan,
and supplement guide.
And you can grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page.
The link is in the description box for that
as well for daily articles, tips, videos and
free supplement giveaways.
So, thanks for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.