What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and in today’s
video here I want to explain why, when you
really break it all down step by step, piece
by piece, building muscle is actually not
that hard.
A lot of beginners have this idea that building
a lean and muscular body is this huge sacrifice
you have to make where you’re just grinding
it out in the gym week after week, you’re
going to war with the weights, you’re depriving
yourself all day long eating chicken breast
and brown rice.
But the reality is that getting into great
shape is really nothing like what a lot of
these body building motivation videos or dramatic
inspirational fitness quotes on Instagram
or even people here on YouTube make it out
to be.
Building muscle and getting strong does require
patients and consistency, yes.
It does require focused effort.
And, yes, there can be challenging times with
it if your motivations dips for some reason,
or you get injured, or some other area in
life gets in the way but in the overall grand
scheme the only, truly challenging part of
the muscle building process, if there is any,
is just in those very beginning stages.
So, the beginning stages where you’re actively
developing the habits of proper training and
proper nutrition, but once you’ve settled
into a routine with it it’s really not that
hard.
And actually if you can learn to enjoy the
process for what it is, if you can learn to
appreciate the directive facts that weight
training and good nutrition have on your mind
and your body then it’s not only not hard
but it’s actually something that you’ll
enjoy doing a good portion of the time.
I mean in terms of weight training, three
workouts per week is really all you’re going
to need.
Now, some people can bump that up to four
or five days in the gym per week if they’re
more intermediate or more advance and they
want to improve their gains, possibly, but
for the vast majority of people out there,
and especially for beginners, three days per
week in the gym for, maybe, an hour of actual
heavy lifting that’s really all it takes.
That’s going to equal out to about two percent
of your total available time, which is obviously
not much to ask for from a time investment
perspective.
And then when it comes to the actual lifting
itself, I know you’ve seen these dramatic
motivational videos of guys screaming at the
top of their lungs with their eyes popping
out of their sockets just barely cranking
out that last rep, but in reality that’s
not actually what effective muscle building
training looks like the vast majority of the
time, if ever.
If you’re more advanced and you’re trying
to get as huge and strong s possible and you’re
moving really big weights, or maybe you’re
a competitive power lifter then, yeah, that
can definitely be challenging.
That’s different.
But training for basic hypertrophy most of
the time is not that hard.
You’ll want to go about a rep or two short
of muscular failure on most of your sets and
doing that on most exercises for most muscle
groups is pretty routine and as long as you
have average paint tolerance then you should
be able to do that without much issue.
I mean, there’s a lot of other types of
physical exercise that would be a lot more
grueling than six to eight reps on a dumbbell
press or a lot pull-down or a barbell curl.
And keep in mind that you’ll also get more
and more accustomed to the physical discomfort
of weight training the longer you’ve been
doing it.
So maybe in the very beginning it will seem
harder if you weren’t doing much exercise
before that.
It might be like a slight shock to your system
at first.
But just like with anything, overtime your
mind will start to adapt and will get easier
and easier.
The only type of hypertrophy training that
I do think is genuinely challenging, at least
for me, would be compound leg exercises.
So things like heavy squats, deadlifts, which
are both of back and a leg exercise of course,
and even a leg press if you’re going heavier
and more intense with it.
Just those really big lifts where you’re
using a lot of muscle groups and you’re
moving heavier weights.
Yeah, those can be tough.
But they still only make up a very small percentage
of your overall routine anyway.
Aside from that, chest training is really
not that hard, shoulders, arms, back, if you’re
going a rep or two short of failure you should
be able to tolerate that type of training
pretty easily.
And for me and for a lot of people where lifting
is just a routine thing, I actually enjoy
training most of the time.
I genuinely like doing it.
More often than not I actually look forward
to my workout.
I like putting my music in.
I like the feeling of moving the weight, getting
a pump.
There’s the whole post-workout high that
comes after that.
I think it all feels good and so there’s
very little genuine discipline involved aside
from, for me leg training, but even that’s
not true for everybody because some people
genuinely like training legs too.
But bottom line weight training for hypertrophy
is physically challenging but it’s not that
challenging.
Especially in comparison to a lot of other
things you could be doing.
You’ll also adapt to it overtime.
You’ll probably start to enjoy it.
It will make you feel good during the time
that you’re away from the gym.
And it’s mostly just a matter of actually
getting yourself to the gym in the first place
and then staying consistent with your routine.
And in terms of nutrition, this is usually
the tougher part for most people, but again,
it’s mainly just a matter of developing
new habits.
So it can be challenging in the beginning
when you’re not quite sure what you’re
doing, you don’t have a good handle on things
like calories and macronutrient, you don’t
know your body well yet, but I promise you
once you do get those things figured out,
which doesn’t take very long, muscle building
nutrition is actually pretty straight forward
too.
You don’t need to track the exact macros
and know precisely how many grams of protein
and carbs and fat you’re eating.
As long as you have a decent handle on your
overall calorie intake and you’re eating
a reasonably balanced diet throughout the
day, that’s really the majority of the process.
You just have to go through those initial
stages to get a feel for which foods contain
what.
What your maintenance calories are.
How much [video skip] You need to get a feel
for which foods contain.
You need to get a feel for your body and figure
out what your maintenance calories are and
how much you need for consistent gains.
But from there once you’ve figured that
out it really just becomes routine, especially
if you tend to eat the same or similar things
from day to day.
And not only that but this whole idea that
building a lean and muscular body means depriving
yourself and eating a boring diet is a completely
outdated concept and it’s really not true
at all.
If you just take some time to look up some
different meal ideas and different recipes
you can hit your nutritional needs and genuinely
enjoy pretty much everything you eat throughout
the day.
There really doesn’t have to be any deprivation
involved.
For me personally, I genuinely look forward
to each meal I eat.
I genuinely enjoy it.
I’m not sitting around eating talape and
brown rice all day, not even close.
Yeah, I have to use some willpower here and
there to keep my calories under control.
I can’t just eat every chocolate brownie
or every piece pizza that I see even though
I would like to but overall it’s something
that you just developed over time and it’s
really not huge deal.
I eat a minimally processed wholefood diet
the majority of the time but I still use meals
and food combinations that are really good
and that I enjoy.
I still allow myself to have higher fat and
higher sugar foods in moderation without any
guilt.
And if I want to go out and drink from time
to time that’s not issue either s long as
I’m not doing it excessively.
What you’ll find is if you’ve developed
these healthier nutritional habits in comparison
to what you’re dong before, you just feel
better on a permanent basis.
You’ll feel better both physically and mentally
and so just like with the weight training
you learn to actually enjoy doing it and you
wouldn’t have it any other way anyway even
if you could.
So the main point of this video here is that
if you’re wanting to build muscle and getting
to better shape but you’ve held back because
it seems that there’s sort of pie in the
sky thing, it’s this big sacrifice you’d
have to make, people who are in great shape
are just these robots who spend their whole
lives in the gym and eat perfectly clean foods
all the time, none of that is actually true.
Unless those people either don’t know what
they’re doing or they are a competitive
athlete whose competing at a high level.
And for everybody else that’s not how it
is and that’s not how it has to be.
The challenging part, if there is any, is
just learning the ropes in the beginning.
Developing the proper habits and learning
how to make your training and your diet fit
your lifestyle.
But once you’ve put in the initial effort
to do that, you’ll start settling in to
the routine with it, training and nutrition
will become a lot easier and once you’ve
start seeing tangible concrete results that’s
going to increase your motivation further
and it’s going to feed on itself and you’ll
probably start enjoying the process rather
than seeing it as a struggle.
So if this is something that you want just
go for it, get started, grind out the initial
stages and you’ll find that after a while
its fairly smooth sailing and it’s really
not as big of a deal as you thought.
So I hope this was helpful, guys.
If you are ready to take control of your body
and your health, and you want a simple step-by-step
guide that shows you exactly what you need
to know in terms of training nutrition and
supplementation in order to get there as efficiently
as possible then you can grab my complete
step-by-step Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BTBluePrint.com
the link for that is in the description box.
Make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe if you enjoyed the video.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
and make sure to follow me on facebook and
Instagram as well, the links for that are
also in the description box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.