Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
lesson I want to answer the question of what
you should do if you are wanting to include
pullups in your training routine but you currently
aren't able to do them using your body weight.
So if you're looking to add width and overall
thickness to your lats then good old-fashioned
pull ups are definitely one of the best exercises
that you can perform, and for solid, long
term muscle-building results, pull ups really
should be included as one of the core movements
in your back routines.
Now the quickest and simplest solution here
is to use an assisted pull up machine.
And this machine allows you to basically place
your knees on a pad and then change the resistance
level up and down in order to vary the difficulty
of the exercise.
So if your gym has one of these assisted pull
up machines then you're already set to go.
Just start off with a level of resistance
that allows you to perform at least 5 to 6
reps in proper form and then just focus on
progressing onward from that point.
Write down the resistance that you used and
how many reps you performed, and then just
aim to improve upon those numbers in the following
week.
And as you progress further and further you'll
eventually reach the point where you no longer
require assistance from the machine and then
you can just go ahead and perform pull ups
using your own bodyweight on a regular bar.
And of course, over time as your bodyweight
becomes too light and you get stronger then
you're going to need to add additional resistance
using a dumbbell or a weight belt.
Now, I understand that not everyone has access
to an assisted pull up machine, and for those
of you who don't the process is just going
to be a little bit different.
So if you don't have access to one of these
machines, then you're going to want to use
a combination of lat pulldowns paired up with
eccentric-only pull up training.
So the first thing you should focus on if
you can't do pull ups with your bodyweight
right now is to use a lat pulldown movement.
Ideally you should perform this using a traditional
lat pulldown machine with a straight bar attachment.
Grip the bar overhand about 6 to 8 inches
outside of shoulder width, and this movement
will essentially simulate the pull up, except
that you're going to be pulling the resistance
downward towards your body instead of pulling
your body upwards, obviously.
And your goal, of course here, is to just
make continual gains in strength by increasing
the amount of weight that you can pull down
or by increasing the number of reps that you
can perform with a given weight.
Increasing your strength on the lat pulldown
will directly assist you in building your
pull up strength.
After you've performed your lat pulldowns,
you're then going to want to move on to eccentric-only
training.
So the "eccentric" is just another word for
the negative phase of an exercise.
So in this case, we are referring to the lowering
phase of the pull up.
So if you can't do pull ups in a positive
fashion, then the only other option is to
do them in a negative fashion.
So your body is actually about 2.5 times stronger
on the eccentric phase, and many studies have
revealed that more overall muscular damage
actually occurs on this phase as opposed to
the positive.
By performing negative-only pull ups, you'll
actually be building up a significant amount
of strength that will eventually allow you
to chin yourself up in a positive fashion.
So the way to perform these is very simple.
Just jump yourself up into the starting position
where your chin is over top of the bar and
it will probably be helpful for you to use
a platform for this and then just lower yourself
down very slowly.
I would recommend doing about 2 to 3 sets
of "negative-only" pull ups of about 5 to
7 reps each.
Keep the lowering phase slow and under control
and aim to lower yourself in about 4-6 seconds.
Try to make it a bit harder each week by either
increasing the total number of reps that you
perform, increasing the lowering time, or
by adding resistance with a weightbelt or
a dumbbell.
After a few weeks of lat pulldowns and negative-only
pull ups, you should start to see your strength
increase quite signficantly.
So just continue with this process until you
can perform at least 4 positive reps using
your own bodyweight, and then just aim to
progress from there like you would with any
other exercise.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you found the information helpful, as always,
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future video lessons.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below and make sure to join the Facebook page
for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.