German volume training is typically 
where in a training session,  
you perform no more than 2 compound exercises 
with 10 sets of 10 repetitions with a 60%  
one-rep max load while using 60-90 
seconds of rest between sets.
This method seems to have 
origins in 1970's Germany,  
where it's believed the national 
weightlifting team established this  
method to markedly increase the muscle mass 
of their athletes during the off-season.
On the internet, it's easy to 
find content claiming German  
Volume Training is highly powerful 
for putting on muscle mass fast.
Moreover, it's fairly easy to come across 
anecdotal stories of individuals stating  
they experienced profound positive increases in 
muscle and strength via German volume training.
Though anecdotes can be highly interesting and 
informative on many occasions, scientific research  
is a much more rigorous and stringent way to 
evaluate the efficacy of a training method.
Fortunately, there have been 
2 studies published in the  
last few years evaluating German volume training.
As we'll see in the later portions of this video,  
there are also other pieces of research 
from the hypertrophy and strength literature  
that can shed further light on how effective 
German volume training might actually be.
Let us kick things off with a 
2017 study by Amirthalingam et al.
19 men with roughly an average 
of 4 years of training experience  
were assigned to either a 5-set or a 10-set group.
Both groups trained three 
times per week for 6 weeks.
On-screen is the program for both groups.
Both groups trained exactly the same,  
except the 5-set group performed only 5 
sets for the first 2 exercises each session,  
whereas the 10-set group performed 10 sets 
for the first 2 exercises each session.
Therefore, the 10-set group essentially 
performed the German volume method,  
while the 5-set group performed 
half of the German volume method.
Both groups rested 60-90 seconds between sets.
Moreover, if a subject successfully completed 
10 repetitions on the final set for an exercise,  
the load was increased by 5-10% for 
that exercise in the next session.
30 minutes after a training session,  
all subjects consumed a whey protein 
supplement containing 30 grams of protein.
Additionally, the researchers encouraged all 
subjects to increase the number of calories  
they consumed each day by 1,000-2,000. Based 
on the data provided, it appears both the 5-set  
and 10-set groups similarly consumed 
around 1,020 more calories per day.
Before and after the 6 weeks of training, 
a range of measurements was evaluated.
For strength gains, one-rep max on the bench 
press, lat pull-down, and leg press was measured.
For hypertrophy, 2 sets of 
different measurements were taken.
Firstly, DXA was used to assess the 
lean mass of the trunk, arms, and legs.
Secondly, ultrasound was used to 
assess the thickness of the biceps,  
triceps, anterior thigh, and posterior thigh 
at roughly the midpoints of the muscles.
What the researchers found 
was increases in the bench  
press and lat pull-down one-rep max were 
significantly greater for the 5-set group,  
while increases in leg press one-rep max 
were statistically similar between groups.
As for the hypertrophy measures, increases 
in arm and trunk lean mass were greater for  
the 5-set group, while increases in leg mass 
were statistically similar between both groups.
Quite fascinatingly, neither the 5-set nor 
the 10-set group experienced statistically  
significant increases in biceps, triceps, 
anterior thigh, or posterior thigh thickness.
It's not clear why this is, especially because 
statistically significant increases in arm,  
trunk, and leg mass were noted 
with the DXA measurements.
In general, ultrasound measurements are considered  
more reliable versus DXA for 
evaluating muscle growth.
Nevertheless, this study does not look 
very promising for German volume training.
It seems performing 5 sets, instead of 10 sets,  
was better for most strength measures 
and some hypertrophy measures.
Now, there are some limitations 
of this study worth noting.
Firstly, the subjects in the 5-set group 
were actually weaker than the subjects in  
the 10-set group on the bench press, lat 
pulldown, and leg press before the study.
This strength difference might actually explain 
why the 5-set group was able to increase their  
one-rep max on the bench press and lat pull-down 
significantly more than the 10-set group.
Secondly, there were only 19 subjects in this 
study, and like most sport science studies,  
this is a small sample size that might 
explain why the researchers were unable  
to find statistically significant increases 
in the ultrasound muscle thickness measures.
Thirdly, this study was only 6 weeks. Perhaps a 
longer time frame would produce different results.
Fortunately, a second 2018 study by Hackett et al.  
evaluated the effects of German 
Volume training for 12 weeks.
12 men with a minimum of 1-year training 
experience were assigned to a 5-set  
or 10-set group.
Both groups trained three 
times per week for 12 weeks.
The program was exactly the same as the previous 
study. For the first 2 exercises in a session,  
the 5-set group performed 5 sets, 
while 10 set-group performed 10 sets.
Both groups rested 60-90 seconds between sets.
Moreover, if a subject successfully completed 
10 repetitions on the final set for an exercise,  
the load was increased by 5-10% for 
that exercise in the next session.
30 minutes after a training session,  
all subjects consumed a whey protein 
supplement containing 30 grams of protein.
Before, after the 6th week, and 
after the 12 weeks of training,  
one-rep max on the bench press 
and leg press was measured.
Also, DXA was used to measure lean 
mass in the trunk, arms, and legs.
The researchers found that bench press one-rep 
max only significantly increased in the 5-set  
group. As for leg press one-rep max, neither group 
experienced statistically significant increases.  
However, the numerical mean did indeed 
seem to increase in both groups,  
and to what seems a similar extent.
As for the DXA measurements, fascinatingly, 
neither group experienced statistically  
significant increases in lean 
mass for the trunk, arms, or legs.
Although, the 10-set group actually experienced a  
statistically significant decrease in 
lean leg mass from week 6 to week 12.
This is quite interesting. It's possible 
the 10-set group might have been failing  
to sufficiently recover between 
sessions, potentially somehow  
resulting in muscle protein breakdown 
exceeding muscle protein synthesis levels.
So, like the previous study, this study looks 
far from promising for German Volume Training.
Now, some limitations should 
be considered with this study.
Firstly, unlike the previous study,  
the researchers did not track the calories 
consumed by the subjects. Therefore,  
it's plausible differences in dietary factors 
between groups could have confounded the results.
Secondly, only DXA measurements were 
used for measuring muscle hypertrophy.  
As we've already noted, DXA isn't considered 
the best tool for measuring muscle hypertrophy.
Thirdly, only 12 subjects were included in this 
study, which is an extremely small sample size.  
Again, a small sample size like this 
may explain why the researchers were  
unable to find statistically significant 
differences for some of the measurements.
Lastly, this study was 12 weeks, 
which is a fair duration. However,  
due to the high volume and fatiguing 
nature of German Volume Training,  
it might have been useful for the subjects to 
take a one-week deload after the final training  
session. The researchers could have also taken 
their measurements after this one-week deload.
Perhaps such a deload would dissipate 
any excessive fatigue and thus  
impact the strength and hypertrophy measurements.
Nevertheless, even with the 
limitations of this study in mind,  
and even with the limitations 
of the first study considered,  
both of these papers still fail to look 
promising for German Volume Training.
These papers indicate performing half of 
what you would with German Volume Training,  
that is, 5 sets instead of 10 sets, might be 
slightly better for strength and hypertrophy.
Having said this, if we evaluated other 
strength and hypertrophy research papers,  
it becomes evident that regardless of 
whether we are talking about performing  
5 or 10 sets of the German Volume 
method, both are likely suboptimal.
Remember, with German volume training, you 
perform sets of 10 repetitions with a 60%  
one-rep max load, while using 
60-90 seconds of rest between sets.
The first issue here relates to how far 
from failure you would be on your sets.
With a 60% one-rep max load, you can generally 
perform approximately 20 repetitions.
As a result, your 1st set 
with German volume training  
is roughly 10 repetitions away from failure.
For optimizing muscle hypertrophy,  
you'd likely want to be 5 or fewer 
repetitions away from failure each set.
Now, your successive sets will get closer and 
closer to failure, and your later sets will  
definitely be well within 5 or fewer repetitions 
from failure, thanks to cumulative fatigue.
In fact, there is data demonstrating 
some individuals cannot fully complete  
10 repetitions on the final few 
sets of German volume training.
However, this still does not resolve the fact 
the first few sets are probably suboptimal for  
building muscle. Therefore, it would likely 
be more efficient and productive to set up  
your training in a way where your working sets 
are at or within 5 repetitions from failure.
The second problem is that you only 
rest 60-90 seconds between sets.
Compound exercises are typically used with 
German volume training, and as thoroughly  
examined in our rest interval video, the 
research suggests with compound exercises,  
2.5 or minutes of rest between sets is optimal 
for building muscle, as well as likely strength.
Let us briefly overview one paper by 
Schoenfeld et al. that demonstrates this.
16 men with at least 6 months of training 
experience performed a range of exercises each  
for 3 sets of repetitions to failure with an 8-12 
rep max load, three times per week for 8 weeks.
All of the exercises, except for 
the leg extension, are compound.
Increases in elbow flexor, triceps 
brachii, anterior quadriceps,  
and vastus lateralis thickness 
favored a group resting for 3 minutes  
compared to a group resting 
for 1 minute between sets.
Additionally, increases in bench press 
and squat one-rep max were significantly  
greater for the group resting 3 minutes between 
sets compared to the group resting 1 minute.
To conclude, combining all of the various 
research papers explored in this video,  
it's apparent the evidence looks far from 
promising for German volume training.
I think it's not unreasonable 
to say it's inefficient and  
likely involves suboptimal variables.
It's important to say that by no means does this 
mean no one should ever do German Volume training.  
If it's something you like to experiment with, I 
think it's perfectly fine and justified to do so.
Furthermore, if you've had positive 
experiences with German volume training,  
by no means can the research presented take this 
away from you or invalidate it. Some individuals  
may highly enjoy this method and be happy 
with the adaptations they experience from it.