What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, RealScienceAthletics.com,
and in this video, the big question, will
the coronavirus lockdown kill your gains?
Now obviously, the title is meant to sound
clickbait-y, but in all seriousness, what
can you realistically expect from this whole
situation in terms of muscle loss versus muscle
gain?
Is a home workout plan, even if it is properly
structured, is that really enough for you
to keep gaining muscle or at least maintain
what you already have?
Or, should you still expect some degree of
regression?
And if so, how much?
So, the answer here is not black and white.
It depends on several different things.
So, let's go over it to give you a better
idea here.
Now, I did a video a few years back titled
How Long Does It Take To Lose Muscle?
So, let me go over a few key points from that
video first.
So, home quarantine workouts aside, assuming
you just stop training altogether, okay, you
don't pick up a single weight, but you still
continue to eat somewhere around your maintenance
calories and you take in sufficient protein,
so around 0.8 grams per pound of body weight
or higher, most of the data shows that it
takes at least two weeks before you'll actually
start losing actual lean muscle tissue.
Now, keep in mind that that's just when the
process will start occurring and then from
there it'll continue occurring at a slow and
gradual pace each week after that.
So as long as your diet is not horrible, okay,
you're not going super low on protein, even
after three, four, five weeks off from training,
the vast majority of your muscle mass will
still remain intact.
You might lose a very small amount, but it
really won't be anything too significant.
What probably will happen though is that you'll
notice that your visual appearance will start
degrading probably after about the two week
mark.
Your overall physique will probably start
to look a bit smoother and flatter and just
less full in general and that will create
the impression that you've lost a whole bunch
of muscle very quickly.
However, just understand that that loss and
fullness is mostly a result of decreases in
water and glycogen levels and to some degree
also from less inflammation in the muscle
tissue as well because of inactivity.
And those are all just temporary factors that
will come back very quickly once you go ahead
and start training again.
So, that's what we're dealing with if we're
talking about not training at all.
So if you haven't been training for the past
two or three weeks, maybe you've gotten a
bit discouraged by this whole situation right
now and you think all your progress is just
going to erode and there's no point in even
trying now, or you've just been under a lot
of mental stress and training just isn't on
your mind and you've decided to take a break,
the good news is that you probably have lost
very little, if anything at this point.
And if you do want to pick yourself back up
and start lifting again, it'll pretty much
be like resuming from where you left off.
You might've lost a little bit of strength,
since strength is a skill and when you stop
performing certain movements, your body is
going to become less efficient at them.
But as far as actual muscle goes, not really
a concern.
Now, what if you have been consistently training
from home in the last few weeks and you plan
to continue from home and your goal is to
either maintain your existing mass or to actually
make new gains and your equipment availability
is either limited or non-existent?
Now obviously, if you have access to a basic
set of training equipment, let's say dumbbells,
a pull up bar and a bench, maybe some resistance
bands, and you have a reasonable amount of
weight handy, then there's no reason at all
why you can't continue making progress.
You can easily train your entire body effectively
with just that.
It may not be 100% optimal depending on exactly
what you have, but even with a very basic
home gym setup, you can definitely continue
moving forward and continue making progress.
If you do have access to a basic home gym
setup and you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
program to maximize your results, and you
can check out my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking up here or in the description
box below, and once you download that plan,
you can just shoot me an email and let me
know exactly what equipment you do have and
I'll go ahead and customize the workout precisely
to your situation.
But now onto the other question, which is
probably what the majority of you are wondering
about is, what if you are limited on weight
and you're limited on the number of different
exercise variations that you can do?
Well, first off is the big issue of weight.
Okay, a lot of people have this idea that
in order to get big you have to lift big.
That would just seem intuitively to be the
case, but we know from the research that that's
not exactly true.
In order to get bigger, you do need to get
stronger over time, but the precise rep range
that you gain your strength in, that's not
nearly as critical as most people think.
The standard hypertrophy range has always
been thought of as somewhere around, I'd say
anywhere from about five to 12 reps or so.
But we now have data showing that sets even
as high as 30 reps can produce comparable
hypertrophy to lower rep sets if, and this
is the key factor, if those sets are taken
close to muscular failure.
Like I talked about in the last video, if
you're just doing some lame pump circuit routine
and you're cranking out a bunch of easy reps
and jumping from exercise to exercise like
so many people are showing on YouTube and
Instagram right now, okay, that's not going
to get the job done.
That is a cardio and conditioning workout,
that is not a hypertrophy workout.
However, if you're treating that 20 or 30
reps set the same way that you treat, say,
a six to eight rep set and you push that set
all the way to the point of being within a
few reps of true muscular failure, I would
say ideally one to two reps short, then not
only will that be enough of a stimulus for
muscle maintenance, but you can actually continue
to grow from that.
Now, we don't necessarily know that over the
long-term someone doing 30 reps per set would
get the exact same gains as someone doing,
let's say, eight reps.
I do have some doubts about that because if
all you're doing is high rep sets, then there
are certain drawbacks associated with that
in terms of cardiovascular fatigue, mid-workout
nausea, excessive soreness, things like that.
But definitely in the shorter term it looks
like higher rep sets do work just fine.
And so, if you have a window that goes all
the way up to 30 reps or so, maybe even a
bit higher, then even with just your body
weight and some basic household stuff like,
let's say, a couch, a table, chairs, a countertop,
a wall, you don't even necessarily need all
of that, but the point is that even with just
your body weight and a few basic tools, you
should have access to enough different exercise
variations to where you can train all your
major muscle groups, put those muscles under
tension, and get close to or all the way to
muscular failure within 30 reps and probably
much less if you're choosing harder exercise
variations.
And as long as you can do that, then there's
no reason why you can't maintain your existing
muscle or continue to build new muscle at
least to some degree.
Your muscles don't know and they don't care
about the fact that you're in a commercial
gym lifting barbells and dumbbells versus
being in your living room using a loaded backpack,
or two five kilo bags of rice, or a suitcase
or whatever else.
The bottom line is that muscles respond to
mechanical tension and it doesn't matter what
training tool you're using or even if it's
just your own body weight.
So, for upper body you've got things like
push-ups.
Okay.
There are plenty of different push-up variations
that can easily get you to failure well before
30 reps, and if you add a bit of weight with
a loaded backpack or by placing a weight on
your upper body, then it's going to be even
more challenging.
You can do handstand push-ups in place of
overhead presses.
You can do dips using the back of two sturdy
chairs or the corner of a countertop.
If you can find a place to do pull-ups, then
that alone will train the majority of your
back musculature right there, especially if
you incorporate different grips and different
angles.
You can do inverted rows using a table or
a countertop or by balancing a pipe or a strong
broomstick across two chairs.
For hamstrings, you've got Nordic leg curls,
single leg Romanian dead lifts, reverse hyper
extensions lying across a countertop, single
leg hip thrusts.
For quads, you've got Bulgarian split squats,
pistol squats, step-ups, lunges, wall squats.
And then most isolation exercises are pretty
easy because they don't require much weight.
And so, even with lighter dumbbells or household
items, you should still be able to get close
to failure within 30 reps pretty easily.
Then on top of this you also have the option
of using blood flow restriction training,
which can produce comparable growth to regular
sets and will make it so that even with very
light weights, the sets are extremely challenging,
even going as low as 20% of your one rep max.
And again, if you're looking for a home structured
workout plan that lists this all out step-by-step,
then you can download my free upper/lower
split that I just uploaded a few days ago
by clicking up here or using the link in the
description box.
The other thing to keep in mind is that there's
a big difference between training for muscle
maintenance versus training for muscle growth,
in that it doesn't require nearly as much
of a training workload for your body to hold
onto its existing mass versus actually building
new muscle.
So, if your goal right now is mainly just
to maintain the bulk of your existing muscle
rather than trying to make new gains, then
that should be very easily achievable.
But the bottom line here, guys, is that whether
you just want to maintain or you want to make
continual ongoing gains, if you can train
your entire body, find movements that get
you within a rep or two of true muscular failure,
and in the case of making new gains, you also
achieve progressive overload by gradually
increasing the workload over time in some
capacity, which I'll talk about very soon
in another video, if you can do those things,
then there is no physiological reason why
you shouldn't be able to at least maintain
and even still grow to some degree.
It's likely not going to be quite as effective
in comparison to having access to a full gym
of training equipment with barbells and dumbbells
of all different weights.
But remember that there's a big difference
between something being effective versus being
optimal, okay?
Just because something isn't optimal, it doesn't
mean that it doesn't still work.
So yeah, if you are able to make continued
gains by training from home, it's probably
not going to be at the same rate as what you
were achieving previously if you're limited
on equipment, but you'll still be able to
move forward to some degree nonetheless.
Now, I'm talking here, of course, in terms
of hypertrophy.
If you're a power lifter, then that's a different
story.
This is not a power lifting channel, but if
raw strength is your primary goal on, say,
the squat bench and deadlift, then yeah, since
strength is partly skill-based and it's based
on nervous system efficiency, if you stop
performing those movements, then you are going
to regress on them to some degree.
But keep in mind that muscle size is also
highly correlated with strength.
So, even if you do just stick to a hypertrophy-based
routine from home, that will still help to
stave off a good chunk of those strength losses.
And then the final point that I'd make on
all of this is that even if you do regress
to some extent during this time, whether it's
in terms of muscle size or strength or both,
because of muscle memory, whatever losses
you do experience, those losses are going
to come back at a much faster pace than it
took to originally build them once you're
back in the gym and you're on your normal
program.
Whenever you train with weights, the number
of nuclei in your muscle cells increases,
and then around those nuclei are smaller satellite
cells that build up.
The amount of nuclei inside of the muscle
is one of the primary factors that determines
how large it can get.
And when you go through a period of de-training,
those satellite cells atrophy, but the additional
nuclei, those stay in place.
And so, as soon as you start training again
at your full capacity, you'll rebuild that
lost muscle at a much faster rate because
that underlying foundation of nuclei is still
there.
So, at the end of the day, there's no reason
to get too depressed about this whole situation,
okay?
With the right program and the right approach
in place, you should be able to maintain the
majority of your existing muscle.
And if you go about things properly and you
keep your diet on point, then there's a decent
chance that you should still be able to keep
progressing to some degree.
And even if, for some reason, you do end up
losing a bit of muscle, you'll regain it very
quickly once this is all over and once you're
back in the gym again.
So, I hope you found this video helpful.
If you have any questions related to at-home
training, you can go ahead and post them in
the comments below.
Hit that like button if this was useful.
If you're new to the channel, don't forget
to subscribe.
@Sean_Nalewanyj is where you can find me on
Instagram for more daily tips and updates.
And RealScienceAthletics.com is where you
can grab my no BS science-based supplements
to fully maximize your results.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I'll talk to
you in the next video.