Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj of EliteImpactLabs.com
here and in today's video I want to discuss
carbohydrates and talk a little bit about
what the best sources of carbs are to include
in your muscle building and fat burning diet.
So when it all comes down to it, carbs are
really just sugar whether you eat a chocolate
bar, whether you eat a piece of fruit, or
whether you eat a bowl of rice it all gets
broken down into the simple form of glucose
one way or another.
So in that sense, a carbohydrate is a carbohydrate
because the end product is ultimately all
the same.
The only real difference here is in how those
carbs are “packaged up”.
Some carbs are going to befound in the high
fiber, high vitamin, high mineral and phytonutrient
dense foods like fruits and vegetables and
whole grains and potatoes and brown rice etcetera
and some are going to be found in less nutritionally-dense,
low fiber foods like cookies and cake and
so called junk food.
It’s not the carbohydrates themselves that
are the cause for concern because remember,
it’s ultimately all glucose when it all
comes down to it, it’s all the “extra
stuff” they either do or don't come with.
Fiber matters, vitamins matter, minerals matter,
phytonutrients matter.
You can’t sit around eating processed, nutritionally
void carb sources all day long and get into
your best shape because you’re going to
miss out on all of those valuable nutrients
and this is why the bulk of your overall carbohydrate
intake should still come from so-called “clean
food sources”, in order to make sure that
your nutritional needs are being met in order
to optimize your body composition and your
gym performance.
Now some people might be wondering about the
issue of “fast-acting carbs” versus “slow-acting
carbs” but to put it simply this is really
irrelevant from the perspective of overall
fat loss versus fat storage.
At the end of the day, your net gains or losses
in body fat are going to be dictated by your
overall net energy consumption versus your
net energy expenditure, not by the speed of
the carbs that you consume.
It really makes no difference in the big picture
if you consume a fast-acting carbohydrate
that ends up being stored as fat more quickly
than a slow-acting carbohydrate that provides
a steady stream of energy, because even if
that fast-acting carb ends up as body fat
at a faster rate, since your body can’t
use all the energy right away, it will still
eventually get broken down and released for
energy by your body later on when it is needed.
The important thing to remember is that fat
loss is not an “on/off” switch.
Fat gain and fat loss are happening all the
time simultaneously in your body.
So whether your carbs get stored for fat more
quickly and are burned later on, or whether
they are steadily burned over a longer time
as they’re released in the bloodstream ultimately
makes no difference at all.
It’s the total energy you consume versus
the total energy you expend over time that
is going to determine your bottom line fat
burning results and besides, when you combine
so-called fast-acting carbohydrates along
with proteins and fats, their absorption rates
are significantly reduced anyway and because
of all of the different possible protein,
carb and fat combinations that you'll be consuming
throughout the week, um, you really have no
way of knowing just how quickly those specific
carbs are going to be broken down when they
are consumed as part of a complete meal.
So it's really not something to even worry
about.
Okay, so we’ve established that number 1,
carbohydrates themselves are all broken down
into basic glucose.
Number 2, the only difference between different
carbohydrate sources is the foods that they
are “packaged up” in.
So taking into account the amount of fiber,
the vitamins, the minerals, etcetera.
And number 3, the issue of fast-acting versus
slow-acting carbohydrates is ultimately a
non-issue when it comes to fat loss because
net energy consumption versus net energy expenditure
is always going to remain constant and because
carbohydrate speeds are significantly altered
when they are combined with proteins and fats.
So, given all of this information that we've
covered so far, what are the best carbohydrates
to eat for maximizing fat loss and muscle
growth?
Well it’s actually very simple and if you’re
aiming to consistently lose body fat every
week, or your're looking to gain muscle while
minimizing fat gains, just forget everything
you’ve ever read about proper carbohydrate
intake and just follow these 3 very simple
guidelines instead.
Number 1, aim to get at least 80 to 90 percent
of your total daily carbohydrate intake from
minimally processed, higher fiber sources.
These foods are going to provide your body
with the fiber, the vitamins, the minerals
and phytonutrients needed to optimize your
body composition and your gym performance
and while controlling your appetite at the
same time.
And gere’s a very good list of foods that
fall into this category.
I'll list it on the screen right now.
Number 2, of that 80 to 90 percent, get in
at least 2 servings of vegetables and 1 to
2 servings of fruit per day.
These are the ultimate in what you call healthy
carbs because they’re packed with tons of
fiber and micronutrients.
Any veggies are ultimately going to be fine,
but green fibrous vegetables are especially
nutritious and this includes sources like
broccoli, lettuce, asparagus, brussels sprouts,
kale, green beans, spinach, etcetera.
And for fruits, the same thing holds true,
though berries such as raspberries, blueberries,
strawberries and blackberries are also especially
valuable.
And number 3, as long as you’re following
guidelines 1 and 2, the remaining 10 to 20
percent of your carbohydrate intake can ultimately
come from any foods that you want.
The idea that you have to eat clean 24 hours
a day to reach your fitness goals is pretty
much just an outdated and downright misguided
method.
As long as the bulk of your carbohydrate intake,
so somewhere in the range of about 80 to 90
percent, is coming from high fiber, micronutrient
dense sources like the ones we just outlined,
you can go ahead and fill that remaining 10
to 20 percent with the cheat foods of your
preference without any negative impact on
your results.
Remember, the issue of fast-acting carbs versus
slow-acting carbs is irrelevant in terms of
your body composition, and since your fiber
and your micronutrient needs are already going
to be easily met with that other 80 to 90
percent of your carbs, there’s really no
need for concern here.
But, of course, if you prefer to eat nothing
but 100 percent clean food, you're free to
do that as well.
This is simply an optional third guideline
for those who would prefer a more flexible
dieting approach.
So it's as simple as that.
Just get 80 to 90 percent of your total carbohydrate
intake from minimally processed, high fiber
sources, get in 2 servings of vegetables and
1 to 2 servings of fruit per day and fill
the remaining amount with any carbs of your
preference as long as they’re being tracked
as part of your overall macronutrient intake.
This type of approach is going to ensure that
your nutritional needs are being met in terms
of fiber, vitamins, minerals and phytonutrients,
while at the same time giving you the dietary
flexibility to enjoy your favorite cheat foods
on a consistent basis without hindering your
bottom line results.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free "28 Day Mass
Building Plan" using the link in the description
box below that includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide, which you
can grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com and make
sure to join the Elite Impact Labs Facebook
page for daily articles, videos, tips and
bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video.
I appreciate all the support and I'll talk
to you again soon with more free tips.