What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com - www.RealScienceAthletics.com.
And in today's video we're talking about the
subject of training frequency, and specifically
the approach of training each individual muscle
group once per week only.
So it's become pretty common nowadays if you
watch most content on the subject of training
frequency for most people to, basically just
crap all over the idea of hitting each muscle
group only once per week.
Saying that it'll only work for steroid users
or for people with way above-average genetics
and that it won't be effective for building
muscle in average natural lifters.
And the truth is that, yes, if you're looking
to gain muscle and strength at the fastest
possible rate, a once per week frequency almost
certainly isn't gonna be ideal for the simple
reason that it doesn't actually take an entire
week for a muscle to recover and grow after
it's been trained.
Depending on how much volume you use and how
intensely your training and other factors
like diet and sleep, somewhere between two
to four days is probably what you're looking
at for full recovery and growth after a given
workout.
So by using a higher frequency your muscles
are going to be stimulated more often and
that's going to produce a higher number of
individual growth periods throughout a given
month and year.
If you only train a muscle once per week then
that's fifty-four growth periods for the year,
whereas if you were to train it one and a
half times a week you'd get eighty-one growth
periods, if you trained it twice a week you'd
get a hundred and four and so on.
And I would say that depending on a person's
individual experience level and the type of
weekly split they're following, anywhere between
one and a half up to three times per week
would be the optimal frequency to fully maximize
the rate of muscle growth over the long run.
I don't necessarily think that twice per week
would literally be twice as effective as once
per week, or that three times a week would
be exactly fifty percent more effective than
twice a week, because there are certain diminishing
returns at play and total volume for the week
as a whole is still gonna be the most important
factor by far.
But, yeah, no question for most natural lifters
training each muscle more than once per week
will be ideal for the very best gains.
Now all that said, despite how strongly some
people will advise against a once per week
frequency it's important to keep in mind that
there's a very big difference between something
being sub-optimal versus being ineffective.
So just because training each muscle once
per week isn't the optimal way to gain muscle
that doesn't mean that it doesn't work or
that it can't be applicable in certain situations.
And in a lot of bodybuilding circles it actually
wasn't that long ago where hitting each muscle
once a week was considered a pretty standard
piece of advice.
And there are plenty of guys out there who
have built great physique and gotten very
big and strong by training exactly that way.
Even speaking for myself, back in my more
bodybuilding focused days when this was a
standard advice, that's exactly how I used
to train and I eventually got up to achieving
probably 85% plus of my genetic muscle building
potential that way.
Would I have gotten faster results with a
higher frequency?
Yeah, most likely.
But I think that's exactly what the main factor
at play here is.
It's primarily speed of results.
So a higher frequency will allow you to see
faster gains because you're stimulating each
muscle for growth more often, however a lower
frequency can still get you to the same goal
eventually as long as the total weekly volume
is still the same, but it'll just take a longer
period of time.
So with all that said there are a few situations
where training each muscle once per week,
which is usually gonna mean a four to five
day per week of some kind, it could be done
in three days per week if you use enough volume
per session, or you could also spread it out
over six days if you really wanted to, but
usually four to five days per week will be
about right for most people.
There are a few situations where that could
be a perfectly reasonable approach.
The first would be if you just really enjoy
that style of training.
So you just find it more fun to go to the
gym and really hammer one or two muscles per
session and give them your full focus rather
than training your entire body or doing an
upper lower split or something along those
lines.
You might have heard the saying that the best
diet is ultimately whichever one you can stick
to, and that same way of thinking could be
applied towards training as well.
Because if you genuinely enjoy your training
then even if it is sub-optimal in terms of
building muscle as quickly as possible there's
a better chance that you'll stay consistent
with it and you'll still end up reaching your
muscle building goals in the long term but
it'll just take a bit more time.
The second situation, and this kind of overlaps
for the first but, maybe your goal isn't even
necessarily to gain as much muscle as you
possibly can.
So if you do want to put on muscle but you're
not trying to look like a bodybuilder, maybe
you're going for a leaner look and so you're
okay with making gains at a slower pace and
you'd rather hit each muscle once because
you prefer that style of training, then in
that case that would be fine as well.
Third would be if it fits into your schedule
better.
So maybe it's more convenient for you to train
for shorter periods more often, maybe you
only have, say, 30 minutes in the morning
to lift and so a full body workout or upper
lower or even legs push-pull is gonna be harder
to fit into that shorter time frame.
In which case you could just go in and train
one or two muscles during that 30 minute period
but do it four to six days per week.
The fourth situation would be if you're in
a maintenance phase and your goal is to just
hold on to whatever existing muscle you've
already built.
In that case, hitting each muscle once per
week will easily be enough to maintain your
games and this wouldn't have to be a [Indiscernible]
either, even three sessions per week would
be fine as long as the workouts contain enough
volume and they're executed properly.
The fifth scenario would be if you find that
it's easier on your joints.
So if you're dealing with a lagging joint
or an injury of some kind then reducing the
overall training workload might be necessary
so that you don't over stress it.
And along with bringing your volume down slightly,
reducing the frequency could be helpful for
that as well.
So if, for example, your shoulder joint is
giving you issues then maybe training your
shoulders twice per week is just going to
be too much and giving them a full week of
rest might be better at least for a temporary
period.
And then one final situation where hitting
certain muscles once a week would make sense,
is if you're a more advanced lifter and you're
going to be running some sort of body part
specialization cycle to bring up a lagging
muscle.
So in that case you would increase the frequency
of the muscle that you were wanting to focus
on, maybe up to, say three or four times a
week, and then you'd bring your other muscles
down to once a week so that you could still
make some progress with them but free up more
time and more recovery resources for whatever
body part you're trying to prioritize.
So bottom line on everything we've covered,
is training each muscle once a week optimal
for seeing gains at the fastest rate?
No, probably not, but as long as the total
overall weekly volume is acquitted then you
can definitely still make significant gains
using a lower frequency but it will likely
just take a longer period of time in comparison
to using a higher frequency.
And on top of that, there are several situations
like I’d just mentioned we're hitting each
muscle once per week might actually be the
better option for some lifters.
So, I hope this advice was helpful.
If you appreciate the no-nonsense science-based
approach toward muscle and losing fat and
you want to get all the tools you need to
map out a complete training nutrition and
supplementation program from A to Z including
step-by-step workouts and meal plans based
on your exact goals, then you can check out
my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here or by visiting www.BTBluePrint.com.
For those who are new to the channel, my brand
new science-based pre workout fish oil and
multivitamin are also now available over at
www.RealScienceAthletics.com, the link is
in the description.
And make sure to hit the like button, leave
a comment, and subscribe below if you haven't
already in order to stay up-to-date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.