The high bar back squat (from 
hereafter simply called the squat)  
is one of the most popular lower body exercises.
This exercise can be executed 
in a variety of ways.  
Stance width, foot orientation, 
and depth can all be altered.
Out of these, depth is probably 
the most commonly debated variable.
It's easy to come across opinions supporting 
either side. One side suggests partial range  
of motion squats maximize the adaptations 
you experience, while the other side may  
suggest you're leaving gains on the table by 
not performing full range of motion squats.
In this article, I'll do my best 
to detail the current literature  
comparing partial range of motion squats 
(in this article defined as squats above  
parallel) to deeper range of motion squats for 
hypertrophy, strength, and athletic outcomes.
Let's dive in.
Starting off with hypertrophy comparisons, 
there are currently two relevant papers.
Bloomquist et al. recruited 17 men untrained at 
least in the 6 months leading up to the study  
and assigned them into a 
partial or deep squat group.
The partial squat group performed squats 
from 0 to 60 degrees of knee flexion,  
while the deep squat group performed squats 
from 0 to 120 degrees of knee flexion.
Both groups trained their respective 
exercise three times per week  
(the program is on-screen) for 12 weeks.
Front thigh cross-sectional area 
(consisting of the quadriceps,  
sartorius, and adductors), measured across 
6 regions, was all greater for the deep  
squat group. The partial squat group only 
experienced growth at the two proximal regions.
Therefore, this study indicates squatting to 120  
degrees of knee flexion evokes greater 
overall growth of the front thigh.
Kubo et al. had 17 men untrained at 
least in the year leading up to the  
study assigned into a partial or deep squat group.
The partial squat group performed squats 
from 0 to 90 degrees of knee flexion,  
while the deep squat group performed squats 
from 0 to 140 degrees of knee flexion.
Both groups trained their exercise for 
3 sets with roughly an 8 rep-max load,  
twice per week for 10 weeks.
After the study, quadriceps volume 
increased similarly in both groups,  
suggesting 90-degree squats may be a 
sufficient depth to optimize quadriceps growth.
However, increases in adductor and gluteus 
maximus volume were significantly greater  
for the deep squat group, suggesting achieving  
deep squat depths is necessary to 
maximize growth of these two muscles.
So, these two studies collectively 
indicate deeper squat depths are  
associated with more hypertrophy overall. 
60-degree squats in the Bloomquist study  
failed to optimize growth across 
many regions of the front thigh,  
while although 90-degree squats in the Kubo 
study seemed to be fine for quad growth, they  
failed to maximize gluteus maximus and adductor 
growth when compared to 140-degree deep squats.
Moving on to strength, how do partial squats 
compare to deep squats for this component?
In total, the literature indicates this 
follows the principle of specificity.
More precisely, the already mentioned two 
studies by Bloomquist and Kubo, as well as a  
study by Rhea et al. and Hartmann et al. indicate 
one-rep max gains on some form of a partial range  
of motion squat are greater for the group that 
trains with that partial range of motion squat  
versus a group that squats deeper. However, 
one-rep max gains on a deep squat is greater  
for the group that trains that deep squat versus 
a group that trains some form of a partial squat.
Now, in all of these studies, they only 
assessed how exclusive partial range of  
motion squat training compares to 
exclusive deeper squat training?
However, could there be any potential benefit to  
combining both partial and 
deeper squats for strength?
A study by Bazyler et al. suggests there might be.
17 men with an average full squat one-rep max of  
146.9kg were assigned to a deep 
squat or combination squat group.
The deep squat group performed full squats (the 
researchers did not provide further detail),  
while the combination group performed 
both full and partial squats  
(the partial squats were performed 
to 100 degrees knee flexion).
A block periodized design with heavy and light 
days was used. Both groups performed similar  
total volume (in this case, the product of load 
x range of motion x repetition number) on the  
squat each week, the only difference being the 
deep squat group performed only full squats,  
while the combination group's volume was 
divided between full and partial squats.
After 12 training weeks, increases in full 
squat one-rep max, and partial squat one-rep max  
(performed to 100 degrees of knee flexion) 
were greater for the combination group.
Therefore, perhaps full and partial squats 
synergistically promote one-rep max strength.
However, there are some things worth 
keeping in mind with this study.
Firstly, the partial squat was 
performed to 100 degrees of knee  
flexion, could the same results be obtained with  
other partial range of motion squats (such as 
a 60-degree knee flexion squat, for example)?
Secondly, the subjects were trained (recall 
their average full squat one-rep max before the  
study was 146.9kg), would the same results 
hold true for less trained individuals?
Thirdly, this is only a single study.  
There are no other studies (to my 
knowledge) with a similar design.
Nonetheless, I think this study's 
finding is quite intriguing,  
and it would be great to see if 
future studies could replicate it.
Progressing on, how do partial 
squats compare to deep squats for  
athletic outcomes such as jumping or sprinting?
Interestingly, your training and 
athletic experience may be a factor here.
The already mentioned study by Bloomquist et al. 
found in men who'd not been training in the 6  
months leading up to the study, training 
with 120-degree squats produced greater  
increases in squat jump and countermovement jump 
height versus training with 60-degree squats.
Comparably, Hartmann et al. established in 
men and women with low training experience,  
full squats produced greater increases 
in squat jump and countermovement jump  
height compared to 60 degrees knee flexion 
partial squats performed in a smith machine.
However, Rhea et al. recruited college athletes 
who squatted an average of 120-130kg and had an  
average vertical jump of 73-75cm, as well as an 
average 40-yard dash between 4.76-4.68 seconds.  
This group of researchers 
compared 3 different squat depths:  
55-65 degree squats, 85-95 degree squats, 
and greater than 110-degree squats.
Overall, the partial 55-65 degree squats 
evoked the greatest increases in vertical jump  
height and 40-yard sprint speed. 
Moreover, the 85-95 degree squats  
also evoked greater increases versus 
the greater than 110-degree squats.
Integrating these three studies, it seems in 
individuals with minimal training experience,  
full squats may be superior for athletic 
development versus partial squats.  
But for trained individuals, partial 
squats may be more favorable.
Having said this, it's worth noting 
there are only three studies,  
and there is only one study 
conducted on trained individuals,  
so future research could definitely 
change these conclusions.
In summary, deep squats seem to provide a more 
powerful stimulus for overall muscle hypertrophy.
As for strength, if you want to 
maximize your deep squat one-rep max,  
training the deep squat likely achieves this 
better than training only partial squats.  
Inversely, if you want to maximize 
your partial squat one-rep max,  
training that partial squat likely achieves 
this better than training only deep squats.  
As we know, one interesting study suggests 
combining both deep and partial squats may  
produce greater deep and partial squat one-rep 
max gains compared to only training deep squats.
For developing athletic attributes 
such as jump height and sprint speed,  
those with minimal training experience seem to 
experience the best adaptations with deep squats,  
as opposed to partial squats. But for those 
with more extensive training experience,  
partial squats may confer 
greater gains in these areas.
Before closing out the article, I thought it would 
be worth touching on injury risks with squats.
It's far from common to hear that deep squats 
are unhealthy for spine and knee health.
Now, I should mention I'm by no stretch 
of the imagination an expert on injuries,  
but I think it's worth sharing this 
extensive review study by Hartmann et al.
The researchers performed a 
comprehensive analysis on whether  
deep squats truly possess greater injury risk. 
Fundamentally, they concluded they did not.
The full text to the study can be found here,  
but one of the things demonstrated 
is how adaptable the body is.
For example, there's data showing professional 
weightlifters (who spend a significant time in  
deep squatting positions) possess significantly 
higher knee joint cartilage thickness versus  
untrained individuals. Moreover, other data 
indicates elite weightlifters possessed 133%  
higher bone mineral density in the lower back 
region compared to untrained individuals.
Finally, and quite interestingly, the 
researchers also suggest that partial squats  
(due to requiring heavier loads 
for an effective stimulus(  
might actually involve a greater 
injury risk versus full squats.