Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
& BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to talk a little bit about vitamin
D and why I definitely think it's a useful
supplement to include in your overall plan
in most cases.
So vitamin D has been getting a lot of attention
recently as a genuinely worthwhile supplement
for optimizing overall health and fitness
and I think rightfully so.
Now there are very few suppplements out there
that I would put in my strongly recommended
category but for most people in most situations
vitamin D is definitely one of them.
So rather than going on and on with a drawn
out explanation of all the nitty gritty details
behind proper Vitamin D supplementation I'm
just going to to go ahead and cover the main
points that you need to know for immediate
use.
So I'll be talking about what it is, what
it does, why you probably need it as well
as proper dosing instructions.
So what is vitamin D and what does it do for
you?
Well, vitamin D is a fat soluable nutrient
and it's one of the 24 micro-nutrients that
are considered to be critical for human health.
Although you can obtain small amounts of vitamin
D from whole foods like egg yolks or cheese,
beef or fatty fish, sunlight is still our
major source of it as your body uses UV rays
to convert cholesterol into vitamin D. Its
health effects are extremely lengthy including
benefits like boosting your immune system,
enhancing cognitive function, improving bone
health, improving mood, well-being as well
as testosterone production as well.
And that's just a very small example.
So next up is why should you supplement with
it?
Well unless you live in a warm climate and
you spend many hours a day outside in the
sun, there is a very good chance that your
vitamin D levels are not in the optimal range.
In fact, this is true for the majority of
people in today's modern society.
On top of this, obtaining enough vitamin D
through whole foods alone would be extremely
difficult if not impossible for you to achieve.
It's unlikely that you're actually deficient
in vitamin D but most people are simply not
in the proper healthy range, and supplementation
has been shown to raise and sustain levels
of vitamin D in the body.
So, although vitamin D supplementation is
not likely to have any direct muscle building
or fat burning effects on its own, its many
positive health effects will still have some
definite carry over into your overall program
and indirectly benefit you.
For example, improved immune system function
would entail getting sick less, improved mood
and well-being can enhance your overall motivation
as well as your concentration levels during
your workout, and in the case that your vitamin
D levels are especially low, the increase
in testosterone could have some noticeable
effects as well.
In any case, muscle building and fat loss
aside, the overall health benefits of vitamin
D and the endless mounds of positive research
that support it are definitely reason enough
to include it in your plan.
And finally, how much vitamin D should you
take and when?
Well, technically speaking, you would actually
have to get blood work done in order to determine
exactly how much vitamin D you need to be
supplementing with each day, and this is because
everybody's baseline levels are going to start
off in a different range and everybody metabolizes
and absorbs vitamin D in varying ways.
That said, for most people, in most cases,
anywhere from 2,000 to 5,000 IU's per day
is a safe and reliable dosage to get yourself
into the proper range and I personally use
5,000 IU's daily.
The risk of vitamin D toxicity is very low
with the available research showing 10,000
IU's to be the safe upper limit.
Vitamin D supplements can be purchased in
either D2 or D3 form and although there is
some debate on this issue, the D3 form is
generally considered to be the more absorbable
of the two.
Vitamin D should ideally be taken with a meal
and it can be taken at any time of the day,
though some people do report having trouble
sleeping if they take it later on in the evening
or close to bed.
Don't worry too much about the specific brand
that you buy but I personally use "NOW Vitamin
D3" in softgel form from Bodybuilding.com
and I'll link that in the description box
below, though you can very easily find vitamin
D3 at your local supplement store if you go
have a look.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.