What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com - www.RealScienceAthletics.com.
And in this video today I want to go over
one critical aspect when it comes to proper
fat loss nutrition that a lot of people overlook,
and it's one of the main reasons why so many
people, who do end up dropping a significant
amount of fat, ultimately end up regaining
it in the long run.
And sometimes even gaining more fat than they
initially started out with.
And that mistake is not having a proper post
diet plan in place.
It's really important to keep in mind that
just because you've reached your objective
fat loss goal on paper doesn't mean that the
work is done.
And there's a key period between the day when
your calorie deficit ends and the weeks and
months that follow that really can make the
difference between maintaining your leanness
moving forward or gradually erasing some,
or even all, of the progress you've made.
What so many people do is they lose the fat
they were aiming for they feel that sense
of accomplishment and then through a combination
of wanting to reward themselves, which is
understandable, and also just not really knowing
how to handle that post cutting period properly,
they end up getting too loose and too complacent
with their diet, they start eating mainly
based on hunger and cravings thinking, it's
no big deal because they've already reached
their goals, and in the end they wind up going
way overboard on total calories to the point
that it really does damage their results.
What you have to remember is that when it
all comes down to it, your body is a survival
machine, it's still wired up for a time when
calories were scarce.
And when you're in a calorie deficit over
a prolonged period that survival mechanism
kicks in as an automatic response and certain
hormonal adjustments are made in order to
conserve energy and to motivate you to find
food and eat.
So leptin levels decrease, which is a hormone
that inhibits hunger; ghrelin, which is a
hormone that makes you feel hungry; increases
hormones that regulate fat loss and fat storage
like T3, T4, cortisol, those shift in favor
of fat storage; and on top of all of this
you'll also have a drop in non-exercise activity
thermogenesis, which basically refers to all
the little actions that you take during the
day that you don't really think about.
So things like standing versus sitting, walking,
fidgeting, these all naturally decrease in
order to conserve energy further.
And these things might not seem like a big
deal but they really can add up quite a bit
to several hundred or even a thousand calories
or more per day.
So the bottom line on all of this is that
once your fat loss diet has ended your body
will be physically primed for fat storage,
your appetite and cravings will be at their
highest, and it's also a time where it's really
easy to mentally justify eating large amounts
of food because of all the hard work you've
put in and because you're no longer trying
to drop more fat.
And so if you don't have a set plan in place
and you start just eating purely based on
instinct you're likely gonna end up setting
yourself up for disappointment in the long
run.
So what should you do to stay on track moving
forward?
One method you'll commonly hear about is the
strategy of reverse dieting where you gradually
increase your calories in small increments
of about five to ten percent per week until
you get back to your maintenance level.
And while this can work fine for some people,
one thing that gets overlooked is the fact
that reverse dieting will actually keep you
in a net calorie deficit for several weeks
even after you've reached your fat loss goal.
So if you were eating in, let's say, a 500
calorie deficit and you finished your cut
at 1,800 calories, a ten percent increase
would only add 180 calories back to your intake,
and so you'd still be in a 320 calorie deficit
overall.
So if you've already reached the level of
leanness you were after, then a slow drawn-out
approach like this is only gonna delay the
amount of time it takes to get your metabolism
re-elevated and your hormones and your appetite
back in check.
So instead of slow reverse dieting, a much
better approach in most cases is to just go
right back to eating at your calorie maintenance
level once your cut is over, because that
way your body can get back to functioning
at its peak as quickly as possible.
And by definition your calorie maintenance
level is whatever amount you require to maintain
your current weight, so as long as you calculate
it properly you don't go overboard you're
not going to be in danger of suddenly gaining
a bunch of unwanted body fat.
Now, that sounds simple enough on the surface
and ultimately it is, but one key thing to
remember is that your maintenance level at
the end of a cut is not going to be the same
as it was at the beginning of your cut.
For example, a lot of people will start off
with a maintenance level of, let's say 2,800
calories, they start cutting at 2,300 calories,
they end the cut at 1,900 and then they just
jump right back to 2,800 or even up to 3,000
or more if they're trying to bulk.
The reality is that your maintenance level
is a moving target, it's not a static number
that never changes.
And as your calorie intake goes up or down
and as your body weight increases or decreases
your maintenance level is also gonna change
along with it.
So once your cut has ended, because you've
been eating less and you now weigh less, your
maintenance level is gonna be lower as well.
Now, there's no perfect way to calculate this,
no calorie calculator is a hundred percent
accurate, it's always just an estimate, so
keep that in mind, but one way you can go
about this is to base your new maintenance
level off of your previous rate of weekly
weight-loss.
For example, if you were losing roughly one
pound per week in the last week or two of
your diet that would represent roughly a 500
calorie deficit, since one kind of fat contains
about 3,500 calories.
So in that case you could just add 500 calories
back to your daily intake which should put
you right around your new maintenance level.
Now, if you're not able to figure it out that
way the other option is to just use a preset
calorie calculator.
So either a basic multiplier of your body
weight in pounds multiplied by between 14
to 16, going with the lower or higher end
depending on your weekly activity level.
Or you can also use the Harris-Benedict formula,
or the Katch-McArdle formula if you know your
body fat percentage.
And I'll outline all three of those in the
description box below that you can check out
for reference.
Whichever method you do use, keep in mind
that you'll probably see a small amount of
immediate weight gain once your calories do
go back up.
And this is mainly just from increases in
water retention, muscle glycogen, and from
just having more food in your system in general,
so don't be alarmed by that because it's completely
normal once you start eating a bit more after
a period of dieting.
So, go ahead and give that initial increase
a few days to settle in and then just monitor
the scale to find the intake that causes your
body weight to stabilize, and at that point
you'll know that you're eating right around
your new maintenance level.
And then from there what you should do next
just depends on your personal goals.
If you're happy to maintain then you can just
leave things as they are, or if your next
goal is to bulk up and gain more muscle you'll
want to add a small calorie surplus on top
of your new maintenance intake, which would
be around 200 to 300 calories for somebody
who's still in the to intermediate stages
of lifting, 300 for a beginner, and about
200 or so for an intermediate, that would
be about right.
Also remember that once you do increase your
calories after a cutting phase, your metabolic
rate is gradually going to climb higher and
higher as your fat burning hormone levels
come back into balance.
So even though your initial maintenance intake
might seem a bit low at the start you should
be able to gradually push it higher and steadily
consume more food as the week's go by while
maintaining the same level of leanness.
So, I hope this was helpful, guys.
Just remember that the end of your calorie
deficit is not the end of your fat loss program
because losing the initial fat is only one
part of the equation and what you do afterwards
to maintain your results is equally as important.
So, thanks for watching.
If you do want to get a complete step-by-step
roadmap that covers all aspects of proper
nutrition for losing fat and building muscle,
not just the post diet period but the entire
process in general, along with fully structured
training, meal plans, and supplementation
plans as well, to fully maximize your progress
over the long term, you can grab my complete
Body Transformation Blueprint program by clicking
up at the top of the screen or by visiting
www.BTBlueprint.com.
For those who are new to the channel, my brand
new science-based pre-workout fish oil and
multivitamin are also now available over at
www.RealScienceAtlethic.com, the link is in
the description.
And make sure to hit that like button, leave
a comment and subscribe below, if you haven't
already, to stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the
next video.