What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj at www.SeanNal.com with a quick
video here today for the younger teen lifters
out there who watch my channel where I want
to, basically, just give you a warning on
what I think is one of the biggest mistake
you can make if you are trying to get a lean
and muscular body but you're still going through
puberty.
So usually that’s going to mean below the
age of about eighteen.
And I think this is more important than ever
right now with just how popular YouTube fitness
has become, Instagram and Facebook as well,
where you constantly seeing images of guys
and girls with very lean physiques, ripped
abs and at that younger age you might be a
bit more prone to being influence by that
kind of stuff.
So I just wanted to make a quick video here
addressing it.
So the one thing that I would suggest avoiding
as younger lifter is trying to maintain a
very low bodyfat percentage and, basically,
trying to get shredded.
Now, I pretty much don’t recommend that
anybody try to get extremely lean and maintain
it year round since it’s generally not healthy
unless you're a genetic outlier or you're
on drugs, and it’s not sustainable either.
It can be done for temporary periods, you
know, if you're competing or if it’s for
something like a photo shoot or some other
event.
But as a long term strategy it’s just not
a good idea.
But this is especially true for teen bodybuilders
or just for any younger guy or girl involve
in fitness, period.
Because trying to get very lean and maintain
that over the longer term can actually have
the side effect of stunting your growth.
Now, just how significant this effect would
be, obviously depends on how lean you're trying
to get, how low your calorie intake is, what
your micronutrient intake is like, how young
you are, the effect could be small for some
people and it could be larger for others.
But nonetheless, it’s just not a risk worth
taking.
If you're still going through puberty then
keep in mind that your body is in a state
of growth and it needs the proper amount of
calories and the proper nutrients to grow
to its full potential.
Not just physically but mentally as well.
So trying to maintain a large calorie deficit
to get a ripped looking body, like maybe your
favorite Instagram fitness figure or a YouTuber,
doing that could end up working against you
in the long run.
There's no evidence to show that weight training
itself has any negative effects on growth,
assuming that you do it properly but consistently
depriving yourself of proper nutrition potentially
could have that effect.
And that’s why in under-developed countries
where malnutrition is a problem that is exactly
what you tend to see.
And if you're trying to maintain a very low
bodyfat that’s essentially what you're doing,
you're basically starving your body of the
calories and the nutrients that it needs for
optimal functioning.
No different than someone else who just doesn’t
have access to proper nutrition in the first
place.
And also if you are paying close attention
to your micronutrient intake while you're
doing this then it’s going to be an ever
bigger problem.
Now, if you are overweight to begin with and
you're in unhealthy bodyfat range then try
to get down to a healthy bodyfat range is
a different scenario.
As long as you're eating a good micronutrient
rich diet, plenty of foods and vegetables,
you're eating minimally process whole foods,
you're getting enough protein and you're not
using an overly aggressive calorie deficit
over a really long period of time, in that
case you should be fine.
Because your body can also use the calories
in your stored bodyfat in order to fuel the
growth process.
But if you're already decently lean as is,
so let’s say you have twelve percent bodyfat,
you have good muscle definition, you can see
your abs when you flex, and that’s good
enough.
And I wouldn’t suggest going any lower than
that.
About twelve to fifty percent is a good range,
I would say.
Don’t use your younger teen years in order
to get ripped.
You use it as a time to build a solid foundation
of overall muscle size and strength.
Focus your teen years on growth and give your
body the calories and nutrients that it needs
in order to do that.
You don’t need to focus on every little
detail and track exact macros.
Just get the fundamental done and focus on
developing the right habits and developing
that longer term consistency that you're going
to need.
Learn proper lifting form and technique.
Learn how to structure a proper program for
yourself.
Make steady strength gains and develop good
healthy nutritional habits.
I think getting into fitness at a young age
is a really positive thing.
It’ll teach you discipline.
It’ll help you build more self confidence.
It’ll teach you how to set goals and work
towards them.
And that’s also going to spill over and
apply to other areas of your life as well
as you move forward.
So it’s a positive thing that you're on
this journey but it’s important that you
go about it the right way.
So don’t worry about all these super lean
physique that you see online.
Nobody actually looks like that in the real
world all the time unless they have extremely
good genetics or they're using drugs or they're
just flat out unhealthy.
And most people, again, don’t look like
their pictures in the real life anyway.
It’s unrealistic at your age to strive for
that and it could be potentially dangerous
to your health as well.
As a teenager, again, don’t focus on leanness,
focus on growth.
You can still have impressive muscle definition
but just don’t go overboard with it.
So, thanks for watching.
Make sure to hit that like button below if
you found this helpful.
Leave a comment and subscribe.
My official website is over at www.SeaNal.com
where you can check out all of my step-by-step
programs, article, free giveaways and other
tips.
And you can also follow on Facebook and Instagram
as well.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.