Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today’s video I’m going to be a
doing a review of citrulline malate.
So this supplement isn’t nearly as popular
in comparison to other performance-boosting
compunds like creatine or beta alanine or
caffeine, but it has been gaining more and
more credibility in recent years as an effective
pre-workout ingredient for improving overall
strength, endurance and bottom line muscle
growth.
So I’ll be covering what citrulline malate
is, what it does, how to take it, possible
side effects as well as my top recommended
product.
So citrulline malate is a combination of the
amino l-citrulline and malic acid, and there
are two primary ways that it might benefit
your program.
The first is by reducing muscular fatigue
during exercise.
Citrulline assists in clearing out metabolic
waste products such as ammonia and lactate
during your workouts, and this should allow
you to basically squeeze out additional reps
on sets that use moderate to high reps.
And in addition to that it's also going to
help you recover more quickly in between sets.
And the second benefit is that it reduces
post workout muscle soreness, and this might
improve overall recovery in between workouts.
So if you’re somebody who is on a higher
frequency plan that has you training each
specific muscle group twice a week or more,
then this might improve your overall strength
and performance if you do tend to get quite
sore after training.
And I will provide a link in the description
box below to the most popular citruline malate
study available that clearly showed both of
the benefits I just mentioned, both a significant
increase in lifting performance and a reduction
in post workout muscle soreness.
Citrulline malate is also marketed for its
supposed ability to raise nitric oxide levels
in the body, but I’m not quite convinced
that this is a legitimate benefit that is
going to carry over to your actual workouts.
Citrulline malate does increase the levels
of l-arginine in your blood, but arginine
is not a limiting factor when it comes to
nitric oxide production.
In other words, your body already has enough
l-arginine circulating in order to maximize
its effects, and dumping a few extra grams
of arginine on top of this is not likely going
to make any significant difference when it
comes to nitric oxide production or when it
comes to your overall workout performance.
So how much citrulline malate should you take
and when?
Well, based on the available research, the
proper citrulline malate dosage in order to
see optimal benefits is going to be between
6-8 grams.
This can be mixed in whatever liquid you prefer
based on your taste preference, and should
be taken anywhere from 30-45 minutes prior
to your training session.
Do keep in mind that citrulline malate does
have a very strong sour taste to it, so you’ll
probably want to mix it in a flavored drink
in order to mask this.
In terms of side effects, The only known side
effect of citrulline malate supplementation
at this time is that it may cause stomach
discomfort in a small percentage of users,
and consuming your citrulline malate on an
empty stomach is going to be the best way
to reduce this effect.
So, who should supplement with citrulline
malate?
Well, I definitely wouldn’t consider citrulline
malate to be a must-have by any means, and
also keep in mind that the actual concrete
research on this supplement is still very
limited.
However, given that the available research
that is out there does show measurable benefits,
and given that the effects of citrulline malate
do make sense on paper, and given that the
real-world feedback is usually positive in
the majority of users, I would say that citrulline
malate is a worthwhile supplement for you
to experiment with if you already have the
basics covered first of all, so you can check
out my complete Fitness Supplementation Guide
using the link in the description box below
to find out which specific supplements that
I consider to be foundational in a muscle
building and fat loss program.
And secondly, assuming that money is not an
issue because this stuff is not particularly
cheap and it is quite a bit more expensive
on a gram per gram basis in comparison to
other popular supplements like creatine or
beta alanine.
And thirdly, because of the way that citrulline
malate functions in the body, it's only going
to primarily benefit those who are following
a training program that involves moderate
to higher reps (so at least 8 reps per set),
shorter intervals in between sets, and a reasonably
high workload per session, and a reasonably
high training frequency.
If you’re utilizing a plan that involves
lower reps and longer resting intervals in
between sets, then the effects of citrulline
malate are going to be far less pronounced,
though it might still be useful for its effects
on reducing post workout muscle soreness.
And the final question here is what is the
best citrulline malate product available.
So there are two main criteria that a high
quality citrulline malate product should meet.
The first criteria is that it should deliver
a chemically bonded source of l-citrulline
and malic acid.
In other words, each molecule of l-citrulline
is directly bonded to each molecule of malic
acid, rather than simply having them dumped
in and mixed together separately.
And the second criteria is that it should
provide a 2:1 ratio of l-citrulline to malic
acid, rather than the 1:1 ratio that some
companies use.
I would also strongly recommend purchasing
a pure citrulline malate powder and measuring
out the dosage for yourself rather than relying
on commercial pre-workouts that simply include
citrulline malate as part of the overall blend.
The proper citrulline malate dosage, again
is going to be between 6-8 grams, and most
of the popular pre-workout formulas on the
market are not even going to come close to
delivering this amount.
So based on that criteria, I personally recommend
Primaforce Citrulline Malate, which I will
provide a link to in the description box,
as it is a bonded source of citrulline malate
and it is present in a 2:1 ratio.
So my overall suggestion when it comes to
citrullina malate is to take the potential
benefits that I’ve outlined in this video
into consideration, weigh it against the cost,
and then decide if you think that it is a
worthwhile supplement to try out based on
your individual situation, and if you do decide
to experiment with it, I’d be curious to
hear your feedback, and if you have used it
up to this point already, then you can go
ahead and leave a comment below and let me
know what your experience with it was.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
the icon at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.