Hey, this is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want to give you three really
good tips for minimizing fat gains during
a bulking cycle. Now, despite what you might
have read in the magazines or on the forums
or in other articles online, you are realistically
not going to build muscle and burn fat at
the same time. If you want to add a serious
amount of muscle to your frame in the shortest
time possible, you're always going to end
up adding some body fat in the process. Now,
this is simply the way the process works.
And if you truly want to travel any real distance
in the bulking direction, you just have to
accept this. Gaining muscle requires a surplus
of calories. But having 100% of those calories
diverted to muscle growth is just not going
to happen. A certain amount of it will always
end up in your fat stores. So, while gaining
muscle without gaining any fat is most likely
not going to happen. Here are three tips to
help you keep those fat gains at an absolute
minimum. So, tip number one is to use a precise
calorie surplus. You know, your body can only
synthesize a limited amount of muscle tissue
in a given day. You do need a surplus of calories
to support muscle growth, but aimlessly stuffing
more food down in your throat in an effort
to super charge your muscle gains is a great
way to get fat quickly. Instead, stick to
a calorie surplus that provides precisely
what your body needs to maximize muscle growth
without any unnecessary excess. A great guideline
for this is to follow a surplus of 15% to
20% above your calorie maintenance level.
So, if you require 2,500 calories per day
to maintain your current weight, you'd aim
for 2,875 to 3,000 calories per day to build
muscle. And I'll link you to a calorie customization
calculator and a free set of meal plans at
the end of this video. Tip number two is to
make sure you're implementing a proper weight
training program. In an overall sense, the
process of building muscle is pretty straightforward.
You train intensely in the gym to trigger
the body's muscle building mechanism, and
then you consume a surplus of calories in
the form of high quality protein, carbohydrates
and fats. And if all goes to plan, most of
that surplus will be diverted to building
new muscle. But what happens if your workout
plan is no good? I mean, this could be due
to any number of things. Maybe you're not
training intensely enough, maybe your training
volume is insufficient, maybe your form is
terrible, or maybe you're just choosing the
wrong exercises. Whatever the reason, a poorly
executed training plan is a recipe for some
serious excess fat gains, because in this
case, all you end up with is a calorie surplus
that has nowhere to go except for your fat
stores. If you want to gain muscle without
the excessive fat, then you need to make sure
that you're fully activating your body's muscle
building response through an intelligently
implemented workout plan. And I'll also link
you to a properly structured weight training
routine at the end of this video as well.
And tip number three is to implement some
extra cardio. While too much cardio can definitely
have a negative impact on your muscle gains,
two to three sessions a week is a good way
to minimize fat gains during a bulking phase.
Now, any form of cardio will provide benefits.
But for the best results, I'd recommend sticking
to high intensity, low duration sessions using
intervals. These types of sessions are typically
in the range of 10 to 20 minutes. And they
alternate between periods of high intensity
and low intensity. High intensity interval
training cardio stimulates greater fat loss
while sparing more lean muscle tissue than
the low intensity cardio does. So, to recap
these three points, number one, stick to a
calorie surplus no higher than 15% to 20%
above your maintenance level. Step number
two; make sure you're following a properly
structured weight training program. And step
number three; add in two to three sessions
of high intensity interval training per week.
Following these simple tips will help you
build new muscle mass each week, while keeping
body fat gains at an absolute minimum. Another
quick tip to control body fat levels is through
a proper supplementation plan. By using the
correct compounds and the right (focus in)
ratio, you can maximize thermogenesis, which
is the number of calories burn as heat, control
your appetite to a greater degree, and increase
the percentage of body fat that is used for
fuel during your workouts. Check out our (little
league) formula for more details on that.
The link is in the description bar. But it's
very important, you know, don't bother with
that unless you're already following the other
three tips outlined in this video first. Fat
burning supplementation can give you an extra
edge both in and out of the gym, but it's
not going to do you any good if you're training
and nutrition isn't in place first. So, I
hope you found this tips useful. Remember,
the goal during a bulking phase is never to
lose fat. It's only to keep fat gains at an
absolute minimum. Then, once you're gaining
the amount of muscle you're happy with, you
can then shift into a cutting cycle to burn
off the extra fat that you've gained. To get
a complete step-by-step muscle building meal
plan and weight training routine that I mentioned
earlier in the video, make sure to sign up
for the no fail system over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
It's free to sign up. And the link is in the
description box for that. There's 13 meal
plans, ranging all the way from 2,000 calories
up to 6,000, and a fully structured weight
training and cardio system that you can start
using right away to get the best results possible
from your program. So, thanks for watching
this video lesson. If you haven't subscribed,
make sure to do that to stay up-to-date on
all of our future videos. And I'll talk to
you again soon with more free tips. Thanks
for watching.