So, what is the real key when it comes to
carrying out a successful cutting phase and
losing fat consistently from week to week?
Well, we know first and foremost that...
What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, realscienceathletics.com,
and in today's video, we're talking about
the real key when it comes to achieving permanent,
long-lasting fat loss success.
This has nothing to do with some BS quick
fix or fad diet solution like you'll find
on so many other channels.
This is straight ahead, legitimate advice
for those who are serious about transforming
their bodies the right way.
Before I jump into the video, if you're new
to the channel and you find these tips helpful,
don't forget to hit the subscribe button below
to stay updated on future videos, and also
make sure to follow me over on Instagram as
well, where I post daily muscle-building and
fat loss tips, photos, videos, personal updates,
and more that you'll definitely find useful.
It's @sean_nalewanyj.
That's where you'll find me when I'm not here
on YouTube.
So what is the real key when it comes to carrying
out a successful cutting phase and losing
fat consistently from week to week?
Well, we know first and foremost that you
need to create a calorie deficit, right?
There's no debate about that among anyone
who knows what they're talking about.
You need to consistently burn more energy
than you take in.
That's the absolute most foundational principle
there is.
It goes beyond the specific foods you eat,
your macronutrient split and meal timing,
training program.
If you want to burn off body fat, there has
to be an energy deficit in place, because
that's what stimulates your body to release
stored fat for use as fuel.
And that's all well and good, but there's
also another very important principle that
goes hand in hand with your calorie deficit
that a lot of times gets overlooked both by
the coaches who give out training and nutrition
advice and by the people who are actually
trying to achieve success with their fat loss
goals.
The big mistake is that so many people out
there are way too hung up on trying to figure
out what specific diet will produce the fastest
rate of progress, what combination of foods
and macros and meal timing and meal spacing,
what combination of those things will get
them to their goal as quickly as possible,
that they totally overlook the factor of sustainability.
What people forget, or what they don't understand
in the first place, is that sustainability
is also an absolutely primary factor in the
fat burning process.
It doesn't matter how effective a given dieting
strategy is at actually creating a calorie
deficit.
If it's not a style of eating that you can
personally maintain over the longterm, then
it's ultimately going to be useless for you
when it all comes down to it, and it's only
going to be a matter of time before you eventually
burn out and quit.
So effectiveness and sustainability go hand
in hand, and they both have to be taken into
account if you're serious about achieving
your goals.
If your diet is sustainable, but it doesn't
put you in a calorie deficit, then that's
of course not going to be successful.
And on the other hand, if your diet does put
you in a calorie deficit, but it's not sustainable,
then that's of course not going to work out
either.
So the real key to fat loss success, as unsexy
as it might sound, and as simple as it might
sound on the surface, is to set up diet in
a way that creates a calorie deficit in the
most sustainable way possible for you.
And I say for you, because this is something
that's going to vary from person to person,
which is another fact that often gets overlooked.
There are so many fitness experts out there
who just stand firmly behind one single method
of dieting and just promote it as the holy
grail for everyone, whether it's intermittent
fasting, or keto, or vegan, or low carb, or
whatever else.
And that might be good for marketing purposes,
if you want to hype something up and sell
more programs, but it's not how things actually
work in the real world.
As long as you're in a net calorie deficit,
there's really no convincing evidence that
any one of these specific diets is actually
going to lead to greater net fat loss over
the longterm when total calories are equated.
And even if one diet does happen to be superior
to another, the difference is likely going
to be marginal overall, and it's not going
to be a strong enough reason to completely
ditch another style of eating that you more
prefer, just for the sake of a small increase
in your rate of fat loss.
Unless you have some hard deadline in place
where you must lose X amount of fat in Y timeframe,
then whether it takes you precisely 10 weeks
or 14 weeks or 18 weeks to get to your goal,
that's really not going to matter in the big
picture.
What matters by far the most is that you just
get to your goal, period.
And so the best fat loss diet for you really
does primarily come down to the issue of sustainability,
selecting an approach that you can adhere
to and stay consistent with.
And what is sustainable for one person might
not be sustainable for another, because there
is variation across the population in terms
of food and macronutrient preferences, meal
timing preferences, lifestyle, goals, and
also how each person prefers to go about things,
whether they want to create a smaller calorie
deficit and lose fat a bit more gradually
over a longer period, or create a larger calorie
deficit that might be a bit more uncomfortable
to stick to, but that they only have to maintain
for a shorter time to reach their goal.
So if you're still new to the whole fat loss
thing, or you've tried to lose fat in the
past, but failed, this is something that you'll
want to experiment with a bit, and you have
to be willing to put in some time and effort
in order to find the approach that you personally
find to be the most enjoyable and the one
that you can stick to as easily as possible.
The more enjoyable you can make the process,
the more you can set things up so that your
hunger levels are minimized, the more seamlessly
your eating plan fits into your lifestyle,
the greater your chances for longterm success
will be.
So maybe that means intermittent fasting,
maybe not eating anything for the first six
to eight hours of the day and pushing your
calories toward the later afternoon or evening.
Maybe that simplifies things for you and makes
it easier to adhere to your deficit.
There's a lot of people out there who use
intermittent fasting successfully.
Or it might not be that.
It might not fit your preferences and lifestyle,
and maybe you just feel better eating a regular
breakfast meal, and so intermittent fasting
is not for you.
Maybe a ketogenic diet works for you.
It's not the type of diet that I would go
out of my way to recommend, because for a
lot of people out there it just isn't practical
and it's a bit too extreme for most people.
But there clearly is a subset of people who
use keto and swear by it and got great results
with it, and will argue to the death about
how effective it is.
So maybe if you've tried other approaches
and you had a hard time with them, maybe a
ketogenic diet or something similar could
be worth experimenting with.
Or maybe you have no need for intermittent
fasting or keto or anything along those lines,
and just a basic, balanced approach with regularly
spaced meals and a more even macronutrient
distribution, maybe that's where you feel
best, and you just want to create a calorie
deficit that way.
And even with the more balanced approach,
which is probably what will be most realistic
for the majority of the population, even within
that, there are still different variables
that you can experiment with to see what you
feel best on.
For example, some people might prefer five
smaller meals per day, whereas others might
prefer three medium sized meals and one snack,
or two large meals and two snacks.
Or maybe you feel best by eating a bit lighter
during the earlier portion of the day, and
then allocating more of your calories toward
the later hours, or vice versa.
Maybe you prefer eating a bit higher protein,
let's say 1.2 grams per pound of body weight,
and eating a bit less carbs and a bit less
fat, versus going lower protein, maybe 0.8
grams per pound of body weight and consuming
a higher amount of carbs and fat.
There's no one magical macronutrient ratio,
and as long as an overall calorie deficit
is in place, then interchanging your protein,
carbs, and fat a bit is not going to be a
big deal when it all comes down to it.
When it comes to incorporating treat foods
into the mix, maybe you're someone who enjoys
just having a smaller treat every single day
and fitting that into your total calorie intake,
or maybe you're someone who finds it hard
to stop at one treat, because it acts like
a trigger food, which then makes you crave
even more.
And so in that case, maybe you just focus
on eating clean the majority of the time,
but then have a more traditional cheat meal
every few days or even once a week.
So these are all different variables that
you can play around with to see what feels
the best for you physically and what is most
convenient.
And as long as total calories for the day
as a whole are equated, and you're in a calorie
deficit, your bottom line fat loss results
are not really going to differ either way.
It really ultimately does just come down to
calories in versus calories out for the day
and for the week as a whole.
I understand that a lot of people out there
want black and white answers and they just
want to be told what the absolute one single
best diet is, the set in stone strategy that
will produce optimal results 100% of the time
without fail.
But the plain fact is that individual variation
is a thing, and in order to create a calorie
deficit that is as sustainable as possible
for you, you're going to need to gain a bit
of experience and learn about yourself and
your body to find what is most sustainable
for you as an individual.
The only universal guidelines that I would
give that should be applied no matter what
type of diet you're on are that number one,
you need to be consuming sufficient protein
each day for muscle recovery and growth.
And I'd say 0.8 grams per pound of body weight
is a safe minimum.
If you're more on the overweight side, then
0.7 grams is probably enough, and you want
to spread that protein out over at least two
individual feedings for the day, and ideally
three or more, although the benefits of going
beyond two will probably be pretty marginal
overall.
Secondly, you should be basing the bulk of
your diet, at least 80 to 90%, around minimally
processed, nutrient dense whole foods.
And you want to do that for the sake of overall
health, and because in virtually all cases,
that's going to make your diet a lot easier
to stick to, because clean foods tend to be
lower in calories relative to their volume.
And then thirdly is that you just want to
make sure you're getting in enough fat to
keep testosterone levels in check.
And I would say 25% of total calories from
fat, that's a good minimum figure to aim for
per day.
But as long as you're doing those basic things,
and you're in a calorie deficit of about 500
calories below maintenance, give or take,
everything else that you do with your diet
in terms of food choices, macronutrient breakdown,
meal timing, treat food incorporation, et
cetera, all of that should be configured in
whatever way allows you as an individual to
stick to your calorie deficit in the most
effortless way possible.
And yes, it will take a bit of work on your
part to figure out what set of variables is
best suited for you.
Losing fat and keeping fat off is not some
sort of 12 week program or quick fix.
This involves an overall lifestyle change
that you'll be maintaining for many years
to come, and if you're not willing to put
in that initial effort upfront, then quite
honestly, this just isn't something you're
truly serious about, and it's only going to
be a matter of time before you likely give
up anyway.
There's a reason why such a high percentage
of people who embark on a fat loss program
ultimately fail in the long run, and that's
because they just dive head first into some
random, hyped up program they found online.
They get excited at first and maybe they stick
to it for a few weeks, but inevitably they
find that it just isn't sustainable and they
eventually give up and quit.
Instead, what you want to do is start off
with one program that has a good set of fundamentals
in place, like I mentioned before, calorie
deficit, sufficient protein, based around
nutrient dense whole foods, sufficient fat.
See how it goes, pay attention to your hunger
levels and what aspects of that plan are working
well for you and which ones aren't, and then
gradually tweak things to your own preference
to find the overall dietary structure that
allows you to hit your daily calorie needs
for fat loss in the way that you enjoy most,
in the way that requires the least effort
and the least willpower, and that you can
realistically stick to over the longterm.
If you found this information helpful and
you want to get what I consider to be the
very best initial program in place, not just
in terms of nutrition, but also weight training,
cardio, and supplementation, so that you can
maximize your rate of fat loss and muscle
growth in a practical and sustainable way,
then make sure to take my physique quiz over
at quiz.seannal.com, because that'll hook
you up with everything you need in an easy
to follow step by step format, based on your
individual body type goals and experience
level.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box below.
On the supplementation side of things, you
can also visit realscienceathletics.com to
check out my science based, no BS supplements
that I personally formulated to help fully
streamline your program and optimize your
overall rate of progress.
And you can use coupon code YouTube15 to save
15% off your entire first order.
And as always, guys, make sure to hit the
like button, leave a comment, and subscribe
below if you haven't already, in order to
stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I will see
you in the next one.