Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this video
I want to share with you a fairly uncommon
but highly effective bent over row variation
known as the “chest supported dumbbell row”.
Now this exercise mimics the same basic movement
pattern as a regular bent over row, except
that you’ll be leaning your upper body against
an incline bench all throughout the lift.
Now the chest supported row offers a few distinct
advantages over standard bent over free weight
rows.
Number 1, it reduces the use of momentum.
Leaning forward with your torso pinned against
the bench makes it a lot harder for you to
basically “heave” the weight up and down
anduse outside momentum to complete each rep,
and this is going to maximize the tension
on your lats and your mid-back for better
overall stimulation and growth.
Number 2, it decreases lower back stress.
This is a huge benefit for those of you who
do experience lower back discomfort during
standard free weight rows.
Again, since your upper body is fully supported
all throughout the exercise, the amount of
stress on the lower back is almost completely
eliminated.
And number 3, it ensures proper rowing posture.
Rather than having to stop the set due to
fatigue in your lower back and your legs,
and this is especially common for beginners
out there, the chest supported row ensures
that you’re able to train the targeted muscles
all the way to muscular failure without any
other areas acting as weak links.
Now the proper form on this exercise is really
quite simple, and here’s how to go about
it.
So you're going to set an adjustable bench
at about a 30-45 degree angle.
Lay face down with your legs straight out
behind you, your head hanging over the top
of the bench and with your neck in a neutral
position.
Hold a pair of dumbbells using a neutral grip,
and while keeping your shoulders down and
back at all times, row the weight up into
ribcage until your lats and your mid-back
are fully contracted.
You can use an overhand or underhand grip
here if you'd like, but most people do find
the neutral grip to be the most comfortable.
Pause in the fully contracted position for
a brief moment and squeeze your shoulder blades
together before lowering the weight back down
to the starting position.
And as with all pulling movements for the
back, you can further maximize the tension
on the target muscles by focusing on pulling
the weights usinggh your elbows rather than
your hands, and by using a set of lifting
straps or lifting hooks to further eliminate
your grip from the equation.
The chest supported row can pretty much be
included anywhere in your back routine for
2-4 sets of anywhere from 5-10 reps.
If you have a questionable lower back or if
you're just looking for a new free weight
bent over row variation to build up your overall
back size and strength, then I would highly
recommend giving the chest supported row a
try and seeing how you like it.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
To get more useful, no B.S training and nutrition
tips to maximize your muscle building and
fat burning progress along with concrete step
by step training and nutrition plans that
you can follow along with, make sure to head
over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab
my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.