In the fitness world, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
seems to be quite controversial.
But, as we've seen in this ongoing series
on muscle growth, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
does indeed seem to be real, there are studies
supporting the existence of it.
For those who haven't seen the previous videos,
and as a review for those who have, let us
briefly overview what sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
is.
Firstly, we need to understand muscles are
organized in hierarchical layers.
Within whole muscles are fascicles, within
fascicles are muscle fibers, and within muscle
fibers are myofibrils.
Myofibrils are where the magic of muscle contraction
occurs, they contain an array of sarcomeres.
Sarcomeres are what generate muscle force.
Specifically, when something called the myosin
head extends from the myosin filament and
pulls on something called the actin filament
towards the M-line, force is generated.
To understand sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, we
need to step back and take a closer look at
the muscle fiber level.
As we've mentioned, muscle fibers contain myofibrils, which are what generate force via their sarcomeres.
Everything else within the muscle fiber can
be considered the sarcoplasm.
The sarcoplasm largely consists of water but
also contains other components, such as glycogen,
sarcoplasmic proteins, and non-contractile
organelles.
Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is where the sarcoplasm
grows at a greater pace than the myofibrils,
meaning that this sarcoplasm growth disproportionately
drives the increase in muscle fiber cross-sectional
area.
As an extra note, myofibrillar hypertrophy
is where the myofibrils and sarcoplasm expand
at the same rate, while myofibrillar packing
is where the myofibrils expand at a greater
rate than the sarcoplasm.
In a previous video, we examined the training
variables used in studies that found evidence
for myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy, and myofibrillar packing in hope
of finding out if there are specific ways
you can train for either.
As we saw, in nearly all of the studies that
found evidence for either of these types of
muscle fiber growth, moderate loads and moderate
frequencies were used.
On the other hand, volume may be the differentiating
factor.
More precisely, low to moderate volumes were
associated with myofibrillar hypertrophy or
myofibrillar packing, while high volumes were
associated with sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
On-screen depicts the long-term studies finding
evidence for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
As is evident, 3/5 of the studies can be classified
as using high volumes.
Now, as we alluded to in the original video,
by no means is this overwhelming or definitive
evidence.
Future research will be of great value for
providing clarity of whether sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy is truly best elicited through
high volumes.
Nonetheless, for the time being, I think the
interpretation that high volumes may make
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy more likely is fair.
Furthermore, as we'll establish in a moment,
there is a logical rationale behind why high
volumes may preferentially stimulate sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
As for loading, the overwhelming majority
of studies in this area have used moderate
loads., and as we saw, this loading produced
all three types of muscle fiber growth.
Thus, the current evidence is insufficient
to inform us if light loads or heavy loads
can preferentially induce sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,
myofibrillar packing, or myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Hopefully future research can clear this up.
Let us now explore what, on the ultrastructural
level, may drive sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
To phrase this another way, we know sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy is where the sarcoplasm grows
disproportionately more than the myofibrils.
But, what may primarily drive this disproportionately
greater sarcoplasm growth?
Some key contenders include:
An increase in glycogen
An Increase in creatine phosphate
An Increase in mitochondria
An Increase in volume of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum
An Increase in volume of transverse tubules
Or an increase in sarcoplasmic proteins
Plausibly, any of these could independently
or collectively drive disproportionate sarcoplasm
growth.
Let us evaluate them.
Firstly, the sarcoplasmic reticulum and transverse
tubules are organelles within muscle fibers
that play a pivotal role in the events leading
up to muscle force production.
Unfortunately, I'm not aware of any research
exploring if the volume of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum or transverse tubules increases
with resistance training.
Therefore, we simply do not know if these
contribute to sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
As for mitochondria, this is an organelle
found within muscle fibers (and other cells
in the human body) that generate chemical
energy.
However, we can probably rule out an increase
in mitochondria contributing to sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
This is because the majority of the evidence
suggests the relative space taken up by mitochondria
does not increase, or may even decrease, in
response to resistance training.
Glycogen, opposingly, may play a role in sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
Glycogen are particles that can be viewed
as a source of energy for muscle fibers.
Each gram of glycogen is stored with at least
3 grams of water.
Therefore, an increase in glycogen within
muscle fibers concurrently increases the amount
of water within the sarcoplasm, causing sarcoplasm
growth.
A study by MacDougall et al. found that after
training the triceps for 5 months with high
volumes, the relative space taken up by glycogen
did increase within triceps muscle fibers.
This data suggests that glycogen indeed may
be able to disproportionately drive sarcoplasm
growth (that is, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy).
However, there is also evidence against this.
Haun et al. found that after 6 weeks of progressing
up to high volumes, the relative space taken
up by glycogen within vastus lateralis muscle
fibers did not increase.
Moreover, it's also important to note high
carbohydrate diets can meaningfully increase
the relative space taken up by glycogen within
muscle fibers.
Also, immediately after hard resistance training,
the relative space taken up by glycogen within
muscle fibers is meaningfully decreased.
Therefore, if glycogen was to drive sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy, this type of growth may be considered
somewhat transient and variable.
In total, based on the information we've detailed,
I think it's fair to say that it's not completely
clear if glycogen is truly a driver of sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
Moving on to creatine phosphate, this is a
molecule that plays a role in recycling ATP,
which is the primary energy carrier in the
body.
It's believed creatine phosphate (particularly
the creatine component) causes an increase
in the amount of water within muscle fibers
too.
Therefore, an increase in creatine phosphate
within muscle fibers may create sarcoplasm
growth via a concurrent increase in water.
Returning to the study by MacDougall et al.
who had subjects train their triceps for 5
months with high volumes, they also observed
an increase in the relative space taken up
by creatine phosphate within the triceps muscle
fibers.
Therefore, perhaps creatine phosphate may
indeed help explain sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Now, some of you probably have questions about
creatine supplementation.
Namely, can creatine supplementation make
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy more likely?
It's important to remember that just because
creatine supplementation may increase water
within muscle fibers, this itself doesn't
guarantee sarcoplasmic hypertrophy in the
long run.
The increase in water within the muscle fiber
would have to be relatively greater than any
myofibril growth achieved with training to
create sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
However, four studies in which subjects supplemented
with creatine monohydrate actually found evidence
for myofibrillar packing after training with
low volumes for 4 to 10 weeks.
Put differently, the myofibrils expanded at
a greater rate than the sarcoplasm, indicating
any increase in water elicited by creatine
supplementation was insufficient to create
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
It's worth emphasizing again low volumes were
used in these four studies.
As we know, perhaps higher volumes are what
creates sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Moreover, recall the study by MacDougall et
al. found with higher volumes that elicited
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, there was a significant
increase in the relative space taken up by
creatine phosphate.
This brings up an interesting question: could
supplementing creatine with high volume training
accentuate sarcoplasmic hypertrophy in comparison
to only training with high volumes without
creatine supplementation.
Unfortunately, there's no research exploring
this, so we cannot make any conclusions.
Anyway, progressing on to sarcoplasmic proteins,
could an increase in sarcoplasmic proteins
also play a role in sarcoplasmic hypertrophy?
Sarcoplasmic proteins are involved in various
chemical reactions within muscle fibers.
Assuming sarcoplasmic proteins are dissolved
in the sarcoplasm, an increase in them could
drive water within the muscle fiber, thereby
growing the sarcoplasm.
In a study by Haun et al., in which sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy was observed after 6 weeks of
progressing to high volumes, the relative
space taken up by sarcoplasmic proteins tended
to increase.
I should mention that many of the sarcoplasmic
proteins that increased were involved in anaerobic
glycolysis, a point that becomes noteworthy
later on.
As a result, this study perhaps suggests an
increase in sarcoplasmic proteins was contributing
to the disproportionate sarcoplasm growth.
Now, I should mention that there was a study
by Vann et al. who observed evidence for sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy, but found the relative space
taken up by sarcoplasmic proteins did not
increase.
However, the thing is the Vann et al. study
did not use high volumes, subjects in their
study only performed 12-16 weekly sets for
the quadriceps.
Returning to the list of studies that found
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, we can see that
it was one of two studies that did not use
high volumes, yet found sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
In the video where we originally explored
this research, I described why the other study
by Penman should be viewed with caution.
No statistical analyses were performed, and
no fiber or whole muscle growth measurement
was given.
Therefore, when ignoring the Penman study,
the study by Vann et al. may currently be
considered somewhat an outlier.
Furthermore, comparing this study to the Haun
et al. study, which progressively worked up
to higher volumes and found an increase in
sarcoplasmic proteins, the magnitude of sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy was much greater in the Haun et
al. study.
So, to conclude this section on what may cause
the sarcoplasm to disproportionately grow,
the current evidence seems promising that
an increase in creatine phosphate and sarcoplasmic
proteins may be involved.
Let us move on to the interesting question
of why sarcoplasmic hypertrophy may even occur
in the first place.
Put differently, what would be the body's
reason for growing the sarcoplasm disproportionately
more than the myofibrils?
There are a few potential candidate scenarios,
a few of these were mentioned in a fascinating
review study by Haun et al.
The first one suggests that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
is a response to high-volume training (that
is, a large number of weekly sets for your
muscle groups).
As we know, there have been 5 long-term studies
finding sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, and 3 of
these used high volumes.
Combine these findings with the findings that
disproportionate sarcoplasm growth may be
driven by an increase in creatine phosphate
and sarcoplasmic proteins, we arrive at a
very interesting potential mechanistic rationale.
Specifically, it makes sense that high-volume
training may cause sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
through significant increases in creatine
phosphate and sarcoplasmic proteins.
Let me explain.
Most people's sets with any given exercise
last far less than 2 minutes.
During this time, 2 energy systems would primarily
be used.
The first one is where creatine phosphate
creates energy for muscle contraction (which
probably lasts 5-10 seconds), while the second
one is anaerobic glycolysis, where glucose
is used to create energy for muscle contraction
(which probably lasts up to 2 minutes).
Now, regardless of whether you perform a high
number or a low number of sets for a given
exercise, you're using both these energy systems.
However, with higher volumes (that is, a high
number of sets), you're taxing these energy
systems more.
In other words, you are using these energy
systems and replenishing them (during the
rest intervals) to a greater extent than using
lower volumes.
Therefore, it's logical that high volume training
would provoke a significant increase in creatine
phosphate and sarcoplasmic proteins involved
in anaerobic glycolysis.
Now, it's important I mention that this is
currently just my hypothesis, I believe the
mentioned logic makes sense based on the current
data, but please remember it is far from a
definitive conclusion.
Future research could very well provide evidence
that renders this hypothesis obsolete.
Moving on, the second scenario behind why
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy may occur is something
novel we haven't addressed at all in this
video but is very reasonable.
It suggests sarcoplasmic hypertrophy may be
merely swelling and nothing else.
To expand on this, in response to exercise
that elicits high degrees of damage, muscle
fibers can swell.
This swelling is a build-up of water within
muscle fibers and thus technically fits the
definition of sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
As an example of this, a study by Yu et al.
had sedentary men run down a staircase for
10 floors.
They took an elevator back up and repeated
this 15 times.
This protocol was likely highly damaging.
Firstly, the workload used was quite substantial
for the untrained subjects.
Secondly, running downstairs results in eccentric
contractions of many lower body muscles, including
the soleus (one of the calf muscles).
Eccentric contractions are where your muscles
produce force while lengthening.
These types of contractions are highly damaging
when you're unaccustomed to them.
What the researchers found was that 7-8 days
after the session, the cross-sectional area
of muscle fibers from the soleus was inflated
by 30%.
The authors suggested, and I would agree,
that this increase in muscle fiber size was
due to the build-up of fluid from swelling.
Now, swelling is only temporary, it eventually
subsides.
Even so, if we return to the long-term studies
that find evidence for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,
we know the majority of these studies used
high volumes.
High volumes can be quite damaging, and thus
one could argue that maybe the results are
simply a reflection of swelling.
However, there are problems with this suggestion.
Firstly, in the Haun et al. study, recall
their data potentially implies that an increase
in sarcoplasmic proteins was at least partially
driving sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
This is independent of swelling.
Secondly, the MacDougall et al. study lasted
5 months.
It's generally thought that the amount of
swelling induced by training gradually diminishes
as you continue training with the same program.
Additionally, they took their measurements
4-6 days after the final training session,
a time point at which swelling is made further
unlikely.
So in total, it's hard to believe swelling
was what explained this study's results.
Thirdly, as we saw in video 2 of this muscle
growth series, there are cross-sectional studies
that find potential evidence for sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy in bodybuilders with numerous
years of previous training experience.
Therefore, all in all, the notion that sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy is merely swelling is very questionable
and I'd argue unlikely.
Moving on to the third potential scenario,
this one quite fascinatingly suggests that
the sarcoplasm grows disproportionately more
in order to be primed and prepared for subsequently
growing myofibrils.
In other words, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is
just a precursor to myofibrillar hypertrophy
or even myofibrillar packing.
The question here is why couldn't the myofibrils
just significantly grow, why must the sarcoplasm
grow disproportionately more first?
The potential answer to this is that growing
myofibrils not only requires a lot of space
but is also an energetically costly process
By increasing the number of components within
a muscle fiber that are involved in generating
energy, such as sarcoplasmic proteins (which
go on to cause sarcoplasm growth), not only
is there more space for myofibrils to grow
into, but the whole process of growing myofibrils
would become much energetically easier for
the muscle fiber.
Overall, this is a very interesting and elegant
hypothesis.
However, at this time, I don't believe there's
any strong evidence for or against it.
Now, this whole scenario could be related
to the previous scenario of sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
being a response to high volume training.
High-volume training may actually be effective
for growing myofibrils and ultimately causing
myofibrillar hypertrophy or even myofibrillar
packing.
It's just that first the body produces sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy (via an increase in energy generating
components) to not only deal with the taxing
high volume training but also prepare the
fibers spatially and energetically for growing
myofibrils.
Again, It's important I mention this is just
a hypothesis, I believe the current evidence
is far from strong enough to verify or falsify
it.
Finally, the fourth potential scenario as
to why the body produces sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
relates to reaching a potential threshold
in the size of myofibrils.
It suggests that muscle fibers significantly
grow myofibrils up until a point, we'll call
this point the myofibril size threshold.
Consequently, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy occurs
via an increase in energy-producing components,
like sarcoplasmic proteins, thereby making
future growth of the myofibrils easier.
Now, there is potentially some supporting
evidence for this.
Returning to the long-term studies that found
evidence for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, we
can see that two of them (the studies by Haun
and Vann) were conducted on trained individuals.
Perhaps the subjects of these studies had
reached their myofibril size thresholds, explaining
why they experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
However, the obvious problem here is that
the three other studies that found evidence
for sarcoplasmic hypertrophy were conducted
on untrained men, who would presumably not
be near their myofibril size threshold.
Therefore, I'd say the current evidence is
probably leaning away from the idea that sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy is a result of reaching a myofibril
size threshold.
To summarize this section of the video, the
idea that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is merely
swelling or that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
is a result of reaching a myofibril size threshold
seems unlikely based on the current evidence.
On the other hand, the evidence is promising
that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy may be a result
of training with high volumes.
Furthermore, although very speculative at
this time, perhaps this is also related to
the notion that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is
essentially spatial and energetic priming
for subsequent myofibril growth.
To close out this video, I think a discussion
on the potential role of anabolic steroids
on sarcoplasmic hypertrophy would be interesting.
Specifically, could taking anabolic steroids
increase the likelihood you experience sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy?
There is indeed some evidence to support this.
For those who've seen our previous video exploring
the research on the 3 types of muscle fiber
growth, you'll know that there were two cross-sectional
studies finding potential evidence of sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
Specifically, a study by MacDougall et al.
found that compared to 5 untrained men, the
muscle samples of 7 well-trained lifters had
more relative space taken up by the sarcoplasm,
potentially implying the well-trained lifters
experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Similarly, a study by Meijer et al. found
that the muscle fibers of 12 bodybuilders
had a lower specific tension value compared
to 6 power athletes and 14 untrained men,
also potentially implying the bodybuilders
experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
In the MacDougall et al. study, 6 out of 7
of the well-trained lifters were using or
had previously used anabolic steroids.
In the Meijer et al. study, 9 out of 12 of
the bodybuilders were reported to be using
anabolic steroids.
Therefore, perhaps this indicates anabolic
steroids may make sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
likely.
Having said this, there is also evidence against
this.
In the Meijer et al. study itself, 3 out of
12 bodybuilders were not on steroids, yet
their specific tension was still lower than
the power athletes and untrained men, suggesting
these natural bodybuilders equivalently experienced
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Furthermore, a different study by D'Antionia
et al. found that compared to untrained men,
2 bodybuilders on anabolic steroids had higher
specific tension of their muscle fibers.
This higher specific tension indicates the
bodybuilders may have actually experienced
myofibrillar packing.
Therefore, based on the current evidence,
it's hard to know what role, if any, anabolic
steroids may play in sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Let us aim to summarize the whole video into
a few takeaway points.
Before mentioning them, it's again essential
to recognize that all the following points
are by no means definitive conclusions, rather
they are based on interpretations of the current
evidence.
Future research could most definitely change
them.
You could potentially train for sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy.
More precisely, it seems using high volumes
(defined as training a muscle with 21 or more
weekly sets) may make sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
more likely.
This may be related to the fact that high
volumes, due to being more taxing on creatine
phosphate and anaerobic glycolysis energy
systems, elicit a significant increase in
creatine phosphate and sarcoplasmic proteins
involved in glycolysis.
Both of these can contribute to disproportionate
sarcoplasm growth.
A very interesting yet very speculative hypothesis
suggests that not only is sarcoplasmic hypertrophy
produced to deal with the high volume training,
but it also may prime the muscle fiber spatially
and energetically for significantly growing
myofibrils.
Essentially meaning that perhaps high-volume
training ultimately causes myofibrillar hypertrophy
or even myofibrillar packing.