There are probably an infinite number 
of ways to train for hypertrophy.
Broadly, most people seem to perform the same 
weekly workouts, at least for a few months.
But, alternatively, an individual could randomly 
change their training variables across workouts.
In one session you may perform more 
sets on your exercises than usual,  
the next session you may 
use a different rep range,  
the session after this you change your rest 
interval durations between sets, and so forth.
The common justification behind frequently  
changing training variables relates 
to confusing or shocking the muscle.
The idea is usually presented as follows: your 
muscles very quickly adapt to a given stimulus,  
meaning training with the same routine 
week after week makes a plateau inevitable.  
To avoid this, frequency changing 
training variables is necessary  
to keep your muscles guessing 
and exposed to the unknown.
This idea is described in many articles online.
Even bodybuilders, such as Arnold, 
can be found discussing this.
So, does frequenctly changing training 
variables stimulate more muscle hypertrophy?
A new study by Fox et al. gives us an insight.
The researchers reported their results across 
2 different papers. So when discussing the  
results later, I would have pulled these 
results from the two different papers.
20 men with an average age of 26, with an 
average of 2.5 years of training experience,  
were recruited.
Each subject had one leg assigned 
to a variation condition,  
and their other leg assigned 
to a constant condition.
Subjects trained both legs twice 
per week for a total of 8 weeks.
With the leg assigned to the constant 
condition, each training session,  
they performed 4 sets of 9-12 repetitions 
to failure on the unilateral leg press,  
and 4 sets of 9-12 repetitions to 
failure on the unilateral leg extension.
They rested 2 minutes between 
sets, and loads were adjusted  
each set and over sessions to ensure 9-12 
repetitions to failure were performed.
With the leg assigned to the variation condition, 
each session, subjects performed either one of  
4 different training protocols in 
a randomized and balanced fashion:
The first training protocol varied repetition 
numbers. It had subjects perform 4 sets of  
25-30 repetitions to failure on the unilateral 
leg press, and 4 sets of 25-30 repetitions to  
failure on the unilateral leg extension. 
2 minutes of rest between sets was used.
The second training protocol varied set 
numbers. It had subjects perform 8 sets of  
9-12 repetitions to failure on the unilateral 
leg press, and 8 sets of 9-12 repetitions to  
failure on the unilateral leg extension. 
2 minutes of rest between sets was used.
The third training protocol varied contraction 
type. More precisely, it had subjects perform  
4 sets of 10 eccentric contractions on 
the leg press and 4 sets of 10 eccentric  
contractions on the leg extension. The load used 
to perform these eccentric contractions was 110%  
of the load they would have 
used during normal repetitions.  
2 minutes of rest was also used 
between sets in this session.
The fourth and final training protocol 
varied rest interval duration.  
It had subjects perform 4 sets of 9-12 
repetitions to failure on the leg press and  
4 sets of 9-12 repetitions to failure on the leg 
extension, with 4 minutes of rest between sets.
So, just to restate and make everything 
clear, the constant condition used the  
same training variables every session, 
while the variation condition did not.
Rather, the variation condition involved 
performing either one of four different  
training protocols in a session in 
a randomized and balanced fashion.
After the 8 weeks of training, 
vastus lateralis cross-sectional area  
increased similarly between both the 
variation and constant conditions.
Increases in cross-sectional area of muscle 
fibers obtained from the vastus lateralis  
were also similar between both the 
variation and constant conditions.
The researchers also measured 
an array of things within the  
muscle fibers obtained from the vastus lateralis.
Perhaps the most interesting thing they found 
was how the two different training conditions  
impacted the space taken up by 
myofibrils within the muscle fibers.
Before detailing what was found, 
it's worth ensuring we understand  
what myofibrils are as well as the 
rest of what makes up muscle fibers.
Within muscle fibers are myofibrils. Myofibrils 
consist of an array of units called sarcomeres.  
Sarcomeres are what generate force. That is, 
they are what generates a muscle's force.
Everything aside from the myofibrils within the 
muscle fiber can be considered the sarcoplasm.  
The sarcoplasm is largely water, but within 
it also resides components like glycogen,  
sarcoplasmic proteins, and other 
non-contractile organelles.
Returning to the study's findings, 
before the training intervention,  
the muscle fibers from the vastus lateralis 
were comprised of around 70% myofibrils.
By the end of the training intervention, 
the constant condition still had roughly 70%  
of their vastus lateralis 
fibers comprised of myofibrils.
However, the variation condition's vastus  
lateralis muscle fibers now 
only contained 61% myofibrils.
What does this mean?
Recall that both conditions experienced similar 
increases in cross-sectional area of muscle fibers  
obtained from the vastus lateralis. That 
is, muscle fiber hypertrophy was similar.
Given the constant condition saw no change in 
the relative space taken up by the myofibrils  
(it remained at roughly 70%), muscle 
fiber hypertrophy was achieved  
via proportion growth of the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm.  
In other words, the myofibrils and sarcoplasm 
grew at the same pace, resulting in the  
myofibrils still occupying the same relative 
space (again, 70%) of the muscle fiber.
This type of muscle fiber hypertrophy, 
where the myofibrils and sarcoplasm  
both grow at the same pace, can be called 
"conventional" or "myofibrillar" hypertrophy.
Contrasting to this, given the 
variation condition saw a decrease  
in the relative space taken up by the 
myofibrils (from roughly 70% to 61%),  
muscle fiber hypertrophy for this condition would 
have been achieved via the sarcoplasm growing  
relatively more than the myofibrils, resulting in 
the myofibrils now taking up less relative space.
This type of muscle fiber hypertrophy, 
where the sarcoplasm grows relatively  
more than the myofibrils, can be 
called "sarcoplasmic" hypertrophy.
As a side note, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy does not 
mean the myofibrils decreased in size. Rather,  
they might have grown to some degree, or they 
may not have grown at all. The key point with  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is just the sarcoplasm 
grew relatively more than the myofibrils,  
which is why the percentage of space 
occupied by the myofibrils decreases.
To summarize the key findings of the study, 
frequently changing training variables does  
not produce more hypertrophy versus training with 
the same routine, but it is not any worse either.
Therefore, this study does not support the 
notions of muscle confusion or shocking.
Intriguingly, despite similar 
magnitudes of hypertrophy,  
the type of hypertrophy at the muscle fiber 
level seemed to differ between conditions.
Frequently manipulating training variables 
appeared to produce sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,  
while maintaining the same training variables 
appeared to produce myofibrillar hypertrophy  
(also called conventional hypertrophy).
Why would this be the case?
Currently, it's not clear whatsoever. The research 
on what occurs within muscle fibers is very much  
in its infancy, and it's very difficult 
to scientifically pinpoint why certain  
training methods would cause sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy or myofibrillar hypertrophy.
But allow me to share one speculation.
Myofibrillar hypertrophy, as it 
involves proportional growth of  
the myofibrils and sarcoplasm, would most 
likely be quite beneficial for strength,  
as remember, the myofibrils 
are what generate force.  
Perhaps training with a constant routine and 
overloading by progressing load (which is what  
the constant condition more or less involved) 
is conducive towards this type of hypertrophy.
Conversely, the variation condition actually ended 
up accumulating more volume load (the product of  
sets x reps x load) by the end of this study. 
Perhaps this, the fact it involved more work,  
was more conductive towards sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy. I speculate this is as  
although it's far from clear what drives the 
disproportionate sarcoplasm growth relative  
to myofibril growth (which we know is what 
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is), it's possible  
an increase in energy generating components 
within the muscle fiber could be involved.
I should again note this is purely speculation.  
As noted earlier, the researchers did measure an 
array of things within the muscle fibers obtained  
from the vastus lateralis. We explored 
the myofibril space measurements already.
But, they also found that a range of 
energy-generating components within the sarcoplasm  
was unchanged by either training condition, 
while total sarcoplasmic protein concentrations,  
perhaps paradoxically, actually only 
increased with the constant condition.  
These details POTENTIALLY oppose 
the notion the variation condition's  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy would be explained by 
an increase in energy generating components.
Overall, I think the findings of 
this study are extremely interesting.  
It emphasizes how although two different 
training programs may produce similar whole  
muscle hypertrophy or similar fiber hypertrophy, 
the changes within the fiber may not be identical.
This makes me think about the broader resistance 
training literature, where it's common to see two  
training protocols producing similar 
whole muscle or fiber hypertrophy.
For example, light loads (30% one-rep max 
loads) have been shown to produce similar  
whole muscle and fiber hypertrophy 
to heavier (80% one-rep max) loads.
In some other areas, different training 
frequencies and volumes have also been  
shown to be similarly effective 
for whole muscle hypertrophy.
Despite this, I wonder if growth within the 
fibers is different between these various things.
Ultimately, the research of exploring what 
occurs within muscle fibers is in its infancy,  
and it will be extremely interesting 
to how this research area develops  
in the future and the potential 
implications it may put forth.
Before closing out the video,  
I think it's worth touching on some 
noteworthy limitations of the study.
Firstly, there were actually some 
measurement disagreements. Let me explain.
We already detailed how training impacted 
the space taken up by myofibrils within  
the muscle fibers. These measures were done 
via something called phalloidin staining.
However, using a method called SDS-PAGE, the 
researchers aimed to determine the amount of  
actin and myosin heavy chain per mg of wet 
tissue from the vastus lateralis fibers.
Actin and myosin heavy chains are 
both proteins found within myofibrils.
If we saw no change in the amount of actin or 
myosin heavy chain per mg of wet tissue after  
training, unless I'm mistaken, this fundamentally 
implies these myofibril proteins still take up the  
same relative space within the muscle fibers. 
This is indicative of myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Conversely, if the amount of actin or myosin 
heavy chain per mg of wet tissue DECREASES after  
training, unless I'm mistaken, this fundamentally 
implies these myofibril proteins take up less  
relative space within the muscle fibers. This 
is indicative of sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
What the researchers found was the amount of 
actin per mg of wet tissue decreased for the  
variation condition, while it remained 
unchanged for the constant condition.  
This indicates the variation condition 
perhaps experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy,  
while the constant condition 
experienced myofibrillar hypertrophy.  
As we know, this is in line with the 
conclusions from the phalloidin staining.
However, the researchers found that the 
amount of myosin heavy chain per mg of  
wet tissue decreased both for the 
variation and constant conditions,  
thereby potentially implying both 
conditions saw sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Unless I've misinterpreted 
something, this is conflicting,  
and it's difficult to reconcile these measurement 
disagreements. I believe different tissue samples  
would have been used for these various measures, 
so this might play some explanatory role.
The second noteworthy limitation is 
the potential sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
experienced by the variation condition 
COULD merely be a result of swelling.
Allow me to explain.
In response to lifting weights that produce 
a high amount of muscle fiber damage,  
muscle fibers can swell for 
numerous hours and days after.
This swelling is a build-up 
of water within muscle fibers,  
and thus technically can be 
considered sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
This swelling is only transient 
and dissipates eventually.
When lifting weights for weeks on end, your 
body does incrementally adapt such that the  
amount of muscle damage it experiences 
after training decreases over time.
The adaptations produced by 
your body to be resilient to  
damage have been called the repeated bout effect.
However, and this is the key point, 
the repeated bout effect is likely best  
when you are consistently training with 
more or less the same training variables  
(which is what the constant condition involved).
When frequently changing training variables 
(as the variation condition involved),  
it's likely the repeated bout effect 
would occur to a lower extent.
Based on this, perhaps the variation condition has 
notable muscle swelling after the study (due to  
muscle damage), thus explaining the sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy measured by the researchers.
Stated another way, it was not 
true sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
The researchers took their measurements 
3 days after the final training session,  
but it's not clear if this 
timeframe is sufficient to allow  
any potential swelling to disappear under 
the training intervention's circumstances.
Ultimately, this all is merely 
speculation, it might or might not be true. 
Unfortunately, the researchers did not 
take any measurements to assess if swelling  
could have confounded the results, so 
nothing definitive can be concluded.
Anyway, Thank you for watching, 
I truly hope you found the video  
interesting and informative in some way!