Hey what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here of EliteImpactLabs.com.
First off, sorry.
It's been a while since I've uploaded a video
here.
We've been or we were extremely hard at work
on our brand new Muscle Amp pre-workout formula
which just launched last week.
These types of projects always take a lot
more time and effort than you anticipate at
the outset.
We really wanted to make this a very, very
high quality product so a lot of work went
into that and I got a little bit sidetracked
and obviously it's been a while since I've
uploaded a video here but I am going to resume
regular videos several times per week here
and I will do a video later this week giving
more information on our pre-workout formula.
But today I want to go back to just uploading
a regular standard fitness and bodybuilding
lesson and I want to answer the question of
whether it is better to do cardio before or
after your weight training session.
So is one time better than the other, should
you avoid either one and is there a better
time altogether.
So let's take a quick look at each situation.
The first is doing cardio before weights.
Now in any weight training program where the
goal is to optimize body composition by maintaining
or increasing lean mass and by losing body
fat, resistance training should always be
treated as your number 1 priority.
Intense weight training is the core stimulus
that causes the body to build and maintain
lean muscle and you should always be entering
every workout with 100 percent of your energy
and focus still in the tank.
And this is especially important for those
whose primary goal is to gain muscle, as the
entire basis for stimulating continued muscle
growth is by consistently increasing the amount
of weight you can lift on all of your exercises
over time.
If you're entering your weight training workout
already pre-fatigued from a full cardio session,
you'll definitely be compromising your strength,
your energy and the amount of resulting muscular
overload that you can achieve.
A pre-workout cardio session is going to increase
muscular fatigue, it's going to raise blood
acidity which raises hydrogen ion circulation
and further decreases performance, and it's
going to also lower your mental focus as well.
The simultaneous increase in muscular fatigue
and the decline in mental focus will also
increase your chances for injury as well so
the bottom line here is whether you're trying
to build muscle or burn fat, scrap the pre-workout
cardio and save it for another time.
The second time is doing your cardio after
weights.
Now many people perform their cardio immediately
after weights under the false assumption that
they'll end up burning more total body fat
at this time.
And the idea here is that because muscle glycogen
levels have been drained as a result of the
workout, more fat will be broken down and
burned during the cardio session.
The reality is that weight training workouts
use up far less glycogen than most people
think.
Even a highly exhaustive session will typically
only lower overall glycogen levels by around
30 or 40 percent, leaving plenty available
for the post-workout cardio session.
The human body is a very complex and dynamic
machine, and trying to manipulate the type
of fuel that is burned during cardio whether
it's fat or carbohydrates is quite honestly
a waste of your time and your effort.
So, we know that post-workout cardio is not
going to increase fat loss, but does that
mean that it's bad?
All in all, post workout cardio is a viable
strategy as long as you have the necessary
mental focus and muscular energy to complete
the session with a sufficient level of intensity.
If you do want to perform your cardio post
workout in order to keep your training as
time-efficient as possible, just try to structure
the session using some basic common sense.
So, for example, if you're doing a high intensity
leg workout then you'd probably be best to
do a shorter duration cardio session that
utilizes some upper body movements, such as
body weight intervals because a high intensity
leg workout followed by 45 minutes of jogging
is obviously not going to be ideal.
Or if you're training smaller muscle groups
like your arms or your calves or your abs,
then any form of cardio is probably going
to be fine, whether it be longer duration
or shorter duration.
Or if your weight training workout has already
lasted an hour and a half then you want to
stick to a brief high intensity cardio workout
to conserve energy and keep things more time-efficient.
Or if you've just trained chest or your back
and you still have sufficient energy left
then just go with whatever form of cardio
you prefer etcetera, etctera.
There is no single, definitive protocol that
will apply to everyone in every situation
but the bottom line is to layout your weight
training and your cardio combination in a
way that allows you to be as time-efficient
as possible and allows you to execute the
session with the necessary focus and intensity
to get the best workout possible.
So to briefly sum up what we just covered.
Number 1, avoid pre-workout cardio altogether
as it will increase muscular fatigue, decrease
mental focus and compromise the effectiveness
of your weight training session.
And number 2, if you want to perform your
cardio post workout, just make sure to structure
the session in a way that allows you to complete
both portions, the weight training and the
cardio, in a time-efficient manner and with
sufficient intensity.
Of course, you can avoid all of these complications
altogether by simply separating your weight
training and your cardio into different sessions
altogether.
That way you'll always enter each session
with 100 percent of your energy and your focus
intact.
So, this could mean performing weight training
and cardio on altogether separate days, performing
cardio in the morning and weight training
in the evening, or performing weight training
in the morning and cardio in the evening.
As with most bodybuilding and fitness issues,
the answers are rarely ever black and white,
and it's often about simply finding the right
balance that works for you based on your body,
your goals and your weekly schedule.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future video lessons.
Also make sure to grab your free "28 Day Mass
Building Plan" using the link in the description
box below that includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide which you can
grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com, and make
sure to join the EliteImpact Labs Facebook
page for daily articles, videos, tips and
bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video lesson
and I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.