Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I just want to give you 5 quick tips
to help you eliminate elbow pain during skull
crushers.
So although they are one of the most common
tricep exercises that you'll see being performed
at the gym, skull crushers are also one of
the very worst movements out there when it
comes to placing unwanted stress on your elbows
and most lifters who include this exercise
in their routine for more than a couple of
years will most likely end up with nagging
elbow pain whenever they perform it if the
proper precautions are not taken.
Before I go any further though, I do want
to stress the following, and that is that
as much as you might enjoy this particular
movement, skull crushers are definitely not
a mandatory exercise and there really is no
hard necessity to include them in your muscle
building routine in the first place anyway.
Yes, skull crushers are a good exercise for
stimulating your triceps but the simple reality
is that there are a million and one other
tricep extension variations out there for
you to choose from that will ultimately be
just as effective.
So if you're currently experiencing a reasonable
amount of elbow pain when performing your
skull crushers, the simplest solution is to
just find a different tricep extension variation
that doesn't give you any problems.
Tricep pushdowns, overhead extensions and
cable kickbacks are all perfectly good choices
and you can also go ahead and experiment with
different angles and attachments on these
exercises in order to find out what works
best for you.
In addition, don't forget that the majority
of your tricep growth will come as a result
of your basic compound pressing exercises
for your chest and your shoulders anyway.
That said, if for some reason you really enjoy
this particular exercise and you want to keep
it in your routine, or if you aren't experiencing
elbow pain yet but you just want to get some
good preventative measures in place then here
you go.
Tip number 1.
Don't go too heavy or perform low reps.
Instead select a weight that you can remain
in complete control of using a slow deliberate
cadence for around 8 to 12 reps.
Skull crushers are anything but a power exercise
and if you start bouncing the weight up and
down using excessive amounts of resistance
then you're just begging to injure your elbows
in the process.
Tip number 2 is to make sure that your technique
is perfect.
So along with using a controlled rep speed
and keeping you elbows tucked in rather than
flared out, also aim to lower the weight slightly
behind the top of your head rather than to
your nose or forehead, and this will keep
the tension on your triceps throughout the
movement but will also take some of the stress
off of your elbows.
Tip number 3 is to cycle them in and out of
your routine.
There's no necessity for you to perform skull
crushers year round and instead you can add
them into your program for 4 or 8 or 12 weeks
at a time, and then simply take some time
off and perform a different tricep extension
variation in its place in order to give your
elbows a chance to recover.
Tip number 4 is to use dumbbells rather than
a straight bar or easy curl bar.
So grab a pair of dumbbells and perform your
skull crushers using a neutral grip with your
palms facing each other.
With your arms now able to move in a more
natural motion rather than being locked into
a fixed position on the bar, your wrists and
your elbows will also be placed under less
stress.
Elbow issues aside this is simply a better
variation from a muscle building perspective
anyway since each arm will now be able to
move independently and one arm can't cheat
for the other.
And Tip number 5 is to roll your shoulders
back at the bottom of the movement instead
of just pressing the dumbbells straight up
and down using pure triceps extension.
So roll your shoulders slightly backward at
the very bottom of the movement before rolling
them forward again in order to extend the
weights up.
And here's an example of what this looks like.
Performing your skull crushers in this fashion
will de-load your elbows at the bottom of
the movement in order to take some of the
stress away.
So if you're looking to keep those skull crushers
in your routine in order to build up your
triceps without the accompanying elbow pain,
Number 1, stick to moderate weights for around
8 to 12 reps.
Number 2, keep your elbows tucked and lower
the weight behind the top of your head.
Number 3, only include them in your routine
for a period of 4 to 12 consecutive weeks
before cycling off.
Number 4, perform them using dumbbells with
a neutral grip.
And Number 5, if you're still experiencing
pain than use the rolling variation to de-load
your elbows in the fully stretched position.
Give these tips a try and see how it goes.
If you've already stressed your elbows to
an excessive degree at this point, then they
may or may not solve the problem and in that
case you'll simply have to introduce a different
tricep extension variation in its place.
However, if you catch it early enough and
start employing these techniques right away
you can probably keep those skull crushers
in your routine without any elbow issues moving
forward.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.