Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And in today's video lesson, I want
to do a quick review of Tribulus supplements.
Now, Tribulus is a flowering plant that grows
in many tropical and moderate areas of the
world. And it's been used for thousands of
years by many different cultures for a variety
of reasons. As a muscle building supplement
though, Tribulus is recognized as a testosterone
booster. Now, testosterone is the most important
muscle building hormone in your body. And
it's actually one of the key limiting factors
that determines how much muscle any given
person can build. Now, Tribulus does not directly
raise testosterone levels, but instead supposedly
works by raising the body's levels of a substance
called, "Luteinizing hormone or LH" for short.
Now, LH is a hormone that is secreted from
your pituitary gland and it stimulates the
body to produce testosterone. So essentially,
LH sets the production of testosterone into
motion. And this would then have positive
implications for muscle growth and workout
performance. Increases in testosterone would
result in increased muscle size, increased
strength; enhance recovery ability, just to
name a few. But what does the actual research
say? Well, the fact is simple. At this point
there has yet to be a single reliable, modern
study that shows a positive relationship between
Tribulus use and an increased in muscle size,
strength or fat loss. Studies that have supposedly
shown this were either conducted in the Eastern
Bloc many years ago or have never been peer-reviewed
in a Western medical journal. In fact, a few
studies do exist that have shown Tribulus
to have no positive effects on lean body
mass or performance. One a study back in 2000,
using 15 subjects, and they were using about
3mg of Tribulus per kilogram of body weight
daily, measured body weight, body composition
and strength over eight weeks of weight training
and Tribulus supplementation. And the study
basically concluded that Tribulus supplementation
has no positive effects on body composition
or training performance. There was an -- also
another study which use as much as 20mg of
Tribulus per kilogram of body weight. And
that also showed no increase in serum androgen
production. So, the important thing to keep
in mind here with any herb that claims to
boost testosterone levels is that boosting
testosterone levels on its own is not enough.
Not only do you have to increase testosterone
levels, but it also has to be to a high enough
level to positively affect muscle size and
strength gains. And this requires upwards
of several hundred to 1,000% plus increases
in testosterone. So, to say that a particular
substance boosts testosterone levels really
doesn't say anything in and of itself. It's
kind of like saying that going grocery shopping
increases your chances of being killed by
a runaway shopping cart. It's true. But the
0.0001% increase has no practical relevance
in the real world. So, even if Tribulus does
increase testosterone levels, which has never
been shown to do, it's almost certain at this
point that it's not to a high enough level
to have any real benefit to bodybuilders.
The only area where Tribulus may have benefit
is as a libido enhancer. Other than that,
leave your Tribulus on the shelf, and stick
to proven supplements with reliable track
records such as whey protein, creatine, beta-alanine,
fish oil and multivitamins et cetera. If you
do want to check out some research-based high
quality muscle building supplements, I'd highly
recommend checking out the formulas that we
offer over on EliteImpactLabs.com. The link
to which is in the description box below.
So, thanks for watching this video. I hope
this information was useful to you. Please
like, comment and subscribe if you did find
the information useful. Don't forget to join
us over on Facebook, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night. And make sure
to grab your free 28-day mass building plan
which includes a free workout, meal plan and
supplement guide. The link to which is also
in the description box below. Thanks again,
for watching. I'll talk to you again soon.