Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video lesson I just want to give you a brief
rundown of the best protein sources for maximizing
muscle growth or for maintaining muscle while
you're on a cut.
So, protein is without a doubt the most vital
nutrient for those who are trying to optimize
their body composition.
Protein is a macronutrient that is made up
of a chain of smaller building blocks called
amino acids.
After you consume and digest protein it will
eventually be broken down into the individual
amino acids to be used for literally thousands
of functions all throughout your body.
Every single process within your body that
is geared towards building muscle mass relies
very heavily on protein.
So, if your body were a house, just think
of protein as the bricks.
Your body already needs protein to carry out
all of its natural everyday processes, so
your consumption of protein needs to increase
as you train intensely with weights.
So, there are 2 main factors to take into
account when you're selecting protein sources
to include in your diet.
The first is going to be the amino acid profile.
Certain protein sources are superior to others
in that they contain an amino acid breakdown
that is more conducive to supporting lean
muscle growth.
Of particular importance are the branched-chain
amino acids, l-leucine, l-valine and l-isoleucine,
with l-leucine being the most critical of
all.
And the second factor is the bio-availability.
And this refers to the percentage of the total
protein content that will actually be absorbed
and utilized by your body.
For example, only about 76 percent of the
protein in rice is utilized by your body compared
to the 97 percent absorption rate of egg.
So, here's a list of what I consider the top
muscle building protein sources available
due to their strong amino acid profiles and
their high bio-availability.
And these sources should ideally make up the
bulk of your total protein intake.
So the first are eggs.
Eggs are a very versatile protein source and
they make for a great breakfast food.
They are ranked second on the biological value
scale next to whey protein, with nearly 100%
of the total protein content being utilized
by your body.
Not only does one whole egg contain about
6 grams of high quality protein, but the yolk
is extremely nutrient dense and provides a
variety of valuable vitamins and minerals
to your body.
Do keep in mind that one whole egg does contain
5 grams of fat, and although there's nothing
inherently wrong with fat itself, consuming
too many whole eggs may shoot your overall
calorie intake too high if you're not careful.
The egg white itself contains virtually zero
fat, so a mix of whole eggs and egg whites
is usually going to be your best bet.
Now, a lot of people shy away from eggs because
of their "high cholesterol" content but it's
important to keep in mind that your body will
naturally adjust its own production of cholesterol
in response to external consumption, and eating
eggs on a regular basis has not been shown
to raise the body's overall levels of cholesterol.
Secondly is lean red meat.
Red meat contains the highest concentration
of growth supporting micronutrients of any
protein source out there.
It's loaded with high amounts of natural creatine,
b-vitamins, iron and zinc, just to name a
few.
Just make sure to stick to leaner sources
in order to keep your total fat and calorie
intake under control.
Next up is lean poultry.
Chicken and turkey are another fitness staple
and can be used to make an endless number
of different bodybuilding meals.
The white portion of the meat is extremely
low in fat and very high in protein.
After that, lean pork.
Although not typically mentioned in most bodybuilding
discussions, lean pork is actually a very
high quality protein source with an extremely
high bio-availability.
Pork tenderloin contains just 1 gram of fat
per ounce, which is about the same as you'd
get from a skinless chicken breast.
Skim Milk.
This is another great protein source and it
offers a variety of different muscle building
benefits.
It contains about 8 grams of protein for one
cup and it can be easily added to your meals
to ensure that your total daily protein requirements
are being met.
It's also a really good choice for mixing
up your protein shakes and smoothies, of course
and it provides a great spectrum of amino
acids along with high amounts of calcium as
well as other valuable vitamins and minerals.
Fish and seafood.
There's almost no end to the possiblechoices
here.
Salmon, cod, tuna, halibut, tilapia, these
are just a few of the possible options.
Not only is fish high in protein, but it also
provides your body with a high amount of the
omega 3 fatty acids EPA and DHA, which are
critical to your overall health as well as
very important for improving muscle growth,
fat loss and joint strength.
Don't overlook other sources of seafood that
you could include in your diet as well, such
as shrimp, crab, lobster, scallops, etcetera.
Next up is cottage cheese.
Cottage cheese contains mostly casein protein
and is also very rich in l-glutamine.
It makes for a great snack and it tastes great
when you mix it with fresh fruit, peanut butter,
canned salmon or it's even great on its own
with just a bit of salt and pepper.
And finally, whey protein.
Whey is a natural component of dairy that
is extracted during the process of turning
milk into cheese.
And though it's often referred to as a “supplement”,
whey is actually a completely natural food
product and it can be incorporated into your
muscle building or fat burning diet in the
same way as any other food.
It's ranked #1 on the biological value scale
and it provides the most effective amino acid
profile for supporting muscle growth and fat
loss.
Whey can be used to make a wide variety of
shakes, and snacks and other recipes and it's
also a very convenient way for you to meet
your daily protein needs.
So that concludes my basic list.
How much protein should you be consuming daily?
Well I've covered this in a few videos in
the past and a simple, straightforward and
highly effective guideline for supporting
muscle growth, fat loss and overall recovery
is to consume 1 gram of protein per pound
of body weight daily.
Simple as that.
So, if you weigh 175 pounds, just shoot for
175 grams of protein and if you measure in
kilos, just keep in mind that 1 kilogram is
equal to 2.2 pounds.
So thanks a lot for watching this video.
I appreciate the support.
If you did find the information useful here
today please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment below and subscribe to stay
up to date on future videos.
Make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box below.