Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here. And in today's video lesson, I want
to talk a little bit about high intensity
interval training-based cardio versus traditional,
slow pace, long duration cardio in terms of
their effects on overall fat loss and lean
body mass. Now, for those of you who aren't
familiar, high intensity interval training
workouts are a style of cardio where the trainee
basically alternates between periods of high
and low intensity throughout the duration
of the session. For example, you could do
60 seconds of high intensity followed by 60
seconds of low intensity or 15 seconds high
intensity followed by 30 seconds high intensity,
et cetera. There are plenty of ways that the
intervals can be structured. But the basic
idea is to train hard and explosively for
short versed followed by a period of rest,
and then repeating it for anywhere from as
few as five minutes up to probably a maximum
of about -- of about 20 minutes. But which
form of cardio is superior for overall fat
loss? Low intensity sessions in the range
of 45 minutes to 60 minutes or high intensity
interval sessions in the 5-minute to 20-minute
range? Now, for years we've been told that
we should be performing our cardio in a steady
state where oxygen supply meets oxygen demand.
And the reason for this recommendation is
because of the way that the body's energy
systems work. When you exercise at a steady,
low intensity pace, fat becomes the body's
preferred source of energy. In comparison,
high intensity bouts of training performed
intermittently will mainly use carbohydrates
for fuel. So, given this information, it would
seem logical that the traditional 45-minute
to 60-minute brisk walks on the treadmill
are the best way to maximize overall fat loss.
But if you take a look at the bigger picture,
you'll actually find that this is not quite
the case. And the reason for this is that
although long duration, slow paced cardio
burns a greater percentage of body fat during
the actual session, high intensity interval-based
cardio burns a greater amount of total body
fat, lasting well beyond the initial exercise.
When you train at a high level of intensity,
you create an oxygen deficit within your body.
And your body is then forced to burn additional
calories for several hours afterwards in order
to correct that deficit. Now, this is known
as, "Excess post-exercise oxygen consumption
or EPOC" for short. Now, this is actually
translates to a significant amount of additional
fat loss in comparison to slow paced cardio.
Well, over short periods of time, the difference
is negligible. But fat loss is a gradual process
to begin with. So this really doesn't come
as any surprise. When you take a look at the
long term effects of high intensity interval
cardio versus slow paced cardio, then the
differences start to become more noteworthy.
One study which I'll link in the description
box below, actually found that over a period
of 20 weeks, trainees performing high intensity
cardio burned up to nine times more fat than
the group doing the regular low intensity
variation. And not only that but the group
performing the high intensity cardio also
retained a greater percentage of their lean
body mass as well. So, if your goal is to
loss body fat while maintaining your hard-earned
muscle, this is the exact effect that you
want to strive for. Now, does this mean that
high intensity cardio should be used as a
complete replacement for traditional slow
paced cardio? No, that's not necessarily what
I'm saying. All I'm really pointing out here
is that in a direct head-to-head comparison,
high intensity interval training burns more
fat and spares more muscle than low intensity
cardio does. However, this comes at a price.
High intensity cardio is more effective, but
it's also more taxing on the body as a whole.
So, depending on your individual recovery
ability, you know, executing a full weight
training plan alongside several high intensity
cardio workouts per week might simply be too
much to recover from. And this is where a
low intensity cardio can be used to help you
strike a good overall balance. It may not
be as potent fat burner as high intensity
cardio is, but it's -- it's certainly still
effective, and it can help you burn through
a few additional calories without overtraining
yourself. For most people following a fat
loss program, a mix of high intensity cardio
and low intensity cardio is probably going
to be ideal. For example, one to two high
intensity interval training workouts per week,
and one to two low intensity sessions per
week, combined with your overall weight training
plan. The best thing is to just play around
with it and see what works best for you as
an individual. So, I hope you found this information
useful. If you did like the video, please
make sure to leave a comment, subscribe to
stay up-to-date on future videos, and hit
the like button below. To get your free 28-day
mass building plan, which includes a free
workout, meal plan and supplement guide, make
sure to click the link in the description
box to download that from EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night. Thanks again
for watching this video. And I'll talk to
you again soon with more free tips.