Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here of EliteImpactLabs.com,
with the muscle in minutes Q&A, where I provide
quick-to-the-point, no B.S.
answers to your bodybuilding and fitness questions.
Today's question is on the issue of muscle
burn.
So, whether or not muscle burn is good, and
whether or not it is indicative of a successful
muscle building set at the gym.
So, the short answer here is no.
Muscle burn does not indicate that you successfully
stimulated muscle growth during your set nor
is it something that you even need to really
worry about during your workouts.
Muscle burn is the result of a rise in acidity
that happens within the muscle tissue as a
result of the breakdown of ATP, which is the
usable energy molecule in your muscles.
So, as that ATP is broken down during the
set, muscle acidity rises, and you feel that
burning sensation in your muscle tissue.
Now, you're going to find that some muscles
burn more than others.
So, calves for example, biceps, traps, these
muscles tend to burn more than other muscle
groups do.
And you'll also find that the rep range that
you're using also influences muscle burning
quite a bit.
So, if you're performing a lower rep set 4,
5 to 6 reps, you'll find that your muscles
won't burn as much as compared to a higher
rep set of say, 10, 11 or 12 reps.
Muscle burn is an inevitable byproduct of
training at the gym, but it's not something
that you need to strive for.
If muscle burn was the sort of central factor
involved in stimulating muscle growth, then
the best muscle building approach would literally
be to go to the gym and grab a pair of 5lbs
dumbbells and just crank out sets of 500,
600 a 1,000 reps or more.
You wouldn't even have to go to the gym.
You could sit at home and grab a pair of soup
cans, and just pump out 1,000 of pec flyes
and get an insane amount of burning your pecs.
But we obviously know that that's not going
to be the best approach for gaining new muscle.
The only thing you really need to worry about
when it comes to gauging the success of your
muscle building sets is two things.
The first and most obvious one is going to
be proper form.
So, you want to make sure that you understand
the mechanics behind the exercises that you're
performing, and that you're actually stimulating
the target muscle.
So, if you're performing a set of chin ups
for example, you want to make sure that you
understand the proper form, so that you are
maximizing lat stimulation and minimizing
bicep stimulation.
Or if you're performing a set of dumbbell
presses, you want to perform them in such
a way that you're actually stimulating your
pecs and minimizing the use of your shoulders
and triceps.
So, that's kind of the obvious starting one.
But the underlying foundational, most important
principle when it comes to gauging the success
of your workout is the simple issue of progressive
overload, which I did a video on previously,
which basically states' that in order to get
-- in order to gain new muscle over time,
you have to consistently increase the amount
of weight and the number of reps that you're
performing over time.
You basically just need to focus on adding
more weight to the bar.
Muscles respond to stress.
And as they adapt, you have to continually
increase the workload in order to produce
new gains.
So, as long as you are training with proper
form and you're training within a hypertrophy
rep range.
So, anywhere as low as 4 to 5 up to about
10 or 12, and you're getting stronger over
time.
So, each time you come back to the gym, you're
performing a few more reps with the same weight
or you're performing the same number of reps
with a heavier weight, and over time those
numbers are increasing, that's honestly all
you really need to worry about.
Muscle pump, muscle burn, muscle soreness,
these are just an inevitable byproducts of
that process.
So, when you go and train, you're going to
feel some muscle burn.
You're going to get a muscle pump.
The next day, you're going to experience a
certain level of muscle soreness.
But these again, are basically just a sideshow.
It's a byproduct of focusing on progressive
overload.
But it's not something that you need to strive
for.
The only thing you need to strive for is lifting
with proper form, and adding weight to the
bar over time.
So, get a training log book, write down the
exercises, the sets, the reps, the amount
of weight you're using, and then just focus
on increasing that over time.
And if you go to the gym, and you beat last
week's performance, then that means you had
a successful workout.
And the next time you go to the gym, you want
to beat that performance.
And overtime, you just want to keep adding
more weight to the bar and getting stronger.
And that's going to result in continual hypertrophy.
So, I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide which you can grab over
on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the elite impact labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video.
I appreciate all of the support.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.