Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and today
I want to briefly discuss buffered creatine
vs creatine monohydrate.
Which is more effective, which one do I recommend
and why.
So when creatine monohydrate first came onto
the scene back in the early 1990's, it pretty
much changed the bodybuilding supplement world
forever.
No other natural muscle building substance
is backed by more concrete research demonstrating
clear, significant effects on muscle growth
and performance than creatine, and ever since
then, an endless number of "new and improved"
versions of creatine have popped up, each
one claiming to be superior to the original
monohydrate in a variety of ways.
Buffered creatine is one of the most popular
of these forms and it apparently uses a "molecular
buffering process" that creates a "100 percent
stable" form of buffered creatine that is
less likely to be converted into the waste
product creatinine.
It's claimed to be up to 10 times more powerful
than standard monohydrate and it's claimed
to have no bloating or cramping, no necessity
for a loading phase and greater creatine uptake
into the muscle cells.
But what is the reality behind these claims?
Well, first of all, it should be noted that
the first two points are essentially irrelevant.
Yes, buffered creatine does not cause bloating
and/or cramping and it does not require a
loading phase, but neither does regular creatine
monohydrate.
The apparent "problems" that are associated
with standard creatine monohydrate are typically
only put forward by companies who are selling
"new and improved" versions of creatine, but
they have no real grounding in any scientific
research.
When using a high quality form of creatine
at the recommended 3 to 5 gram per day dosage,
creatine monohydrate has been consistently
shown to be both completely safe and effective
and it should also be noted that most, the
most popular brand of buffered creatine still
contains about 98 percent creatine monohydate,
with the "buffer" making up the other 2 percent.
So what about the actual effects of buffered
creatine vs creatine monohydrate?
Well a new study was actually released fairly
recently back in September 2012 in The Journal
Of The International Society Of Sports Nutrition
that examined this issue in quite a bit of
detail.
It was a double blind study with 36 participants
and they supplemented with creatine using
the following protocols.
The first group was standard creatine monohydrate
using a loading phase of 20 grams a day for
5 days followed by a standard maintenance
phase.
The second group used the manufacturer's recommended
dosage of buffered creatine which was 1 and
a half grams per day and the third group used
the buffered creatine but at the same dosing
protocol as the first creatine monohydrate
group.
And here's what the researchers found.
On the issue of creatine absorption and effects
on muscle mass and performance: “Neither
manufacturers recommended doses or equivalent
loading doses of buffered creatine promoted
greater changes in muscle creatine content,
body composition, strength, or anaerobic capacity
than creatine monohydrate.
These findings do not support claims that
buffered creatine is a more efficacious form
of creatine.”
On the issue of safety: “Neither manufacturers
recommended doses or equivalent loading doses
of buffered creatine compared to creatine
monohydrate resulted in any negative side-effects
or health, health outcomes.
Additionally, there was no evidence that creatine
monohydrate supplementation experienced a
greater degradation of creatinine, greater
degradation to creatinine, sorry.
These findings suggest that buffered creatine
is just as safe to consume as creatine monohydrate
with minimal side-effects.”
And the final word: "Buffered creatine supplementation
does not promote greater changes in muscle
creatine content, body composition, or training
adaptations in comparison to creatine monohydrate
and buffered creatine supplementation does
not exhibit a safer clinical profile or have
less side effects in comparison to creatine
monohydrate”.
And I'll link that study in the description
box below if you want to check it out yourself.
In addition to this it should be noted that
on a gram for gram basis, buffered creatine
is significantly more expensive than regular
creatine monohydrate, at roughly 20 cents
per gram, depending on where you buy it from,
compared to roughly 3 cents per gram for standard
creatine monohydrate and that makes it about
7 times more expensive.
My suggestion is to examine the claims, review
the concrete research that I've provided,
compare the prices and then just go ahead
and make up your mind for yourself.
So thanks alot for watching this video.
If you did find the information useful here
today please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up to
date on all of my future video lessons.
Make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link to that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.