Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today’s video I just want to share
a very quick and simple tip when it comes
to proper skull crushers form to help you
get the very most out of the exercise if you
do include them in your tricep workout.
So skull crushers are an effective way to
target the long head of your triceps, and
they can be performed using either an ez-curl
bar or dumbbells.
So aside from the more basic things like keeping
your elbows tucked in and not allowing them
to flare out as well as performing the exercise
using moderate weight and under strict control
in order to take the pressure off of your
elbows, here’s one other basic tweak to
keep in mind.
And that is, instead of beginning the movement
with your arms extended directly above your
head and perpendicular to the floor and then
performing your skull crushers from that position,
instead what you want to do is lower your
arms a couple of inches toward your head at
a slight angle and use this as your starting
position.
And from there, instead of lowering the weight
down to your forehead, lower it just behind
the top of your head instead.
And then just extend the weight back up and
stop in that same “tilted” arm positon
that you began in.
Now aside from the fact that this variation
reduces the stress on your elbows a bit, it
also improves overall tricep stimulation by
providing continuous tension throughout the
entire range of motion.
When you fully extend your arms until they’re
perpendicular to the floor like most people
do, you end up with very little to no tension
on the triceps in the top position because
the force of gravity is just pulling the weight
straight down.
And this basically de-activates your triceps
and gives them a brief rest at the top of
every single rep.
So by stopping a couple inches short of perpendicular,
your triceps are going to remain fully active
from the very bottom of the movement all the
way up to the very top because they’ll be
constantly working in order to prevent the
weight from basically falling back towards
your face.
So, give this skull crusher variation a try
and you should feel a deeper activation in
your triceps because they won’t be receiving
those constant rest periods like they do when
you extend your arms all the way to perpendicular.
The difference probably won’t be anything
too dramatic, but every little bit adds up
over the long term, and this skull crusher
form variation is definitely the superior
way to perform this exercise.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn a ton of other simple
but highly effective training tips just like
this one, along with nutrition and supplementation
information to help you maximize your muscle
building and your fat burning progress, make
sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System and you can do that by
clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.