Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today’s video I want to quickly address
the topic of “creatine bloating”.
So there’s no question that creatine is
the real deal when it comes to effective natural
muscle building supplementation.
It is absolutely research proven to improve
training performance and to increase muscle
cell hydration, and creatine is easily the
most effective natural muscle building compound
available at this point.
But despite creatine’s positive effects,
some people still shy away from creatine supplementation
out of fear that it will cause their muscles
to appear "soft" or "bloated".
In reality, the entire notion of “creatine
bloating” is a completely false concept.
Yes, creatine does increase water retention,
but in order for that water retention to cause
any form of “bloating”, that water would
need to be stored subcutaneously, or directly
underneath your skin in other words.
The water retention that results from creatine
supplementation is almost entirely intra-cellular
assuming that you’re using a high quality
product.
In other words, creatine pulls water into
the actual muscle cell itself with little
to no effect on subcutaneous water retention.
If anything, creatine should cause your muscles
to appear harder and more defined.
So where did this whole “creatine bloating”
myth originate from?
Well, it's probably the result of 2 main causes.
First off, it could simply be the result of
those who are using creatine in conjunction
with a very high-calorie mass gaining diet.
When your overall calorie intake and carbohydrate
intake reaches an excessive level, you’re
likely going to experience a noticeable increase
in subcutaneous water retention, and this
is going to cause you to appear flatter and
softer looking.
Those on a high calorie diet who are not accurately
tracking their total macronutrient intake
may mistakenly think that it’s the creatine
that is causing the bloating, when in fact
it’s just a simple issue of their excessive
food intake.
Then add in the fact that most people follow
the unnecessary "creatine loading phase" protocol
of 20 grams of creatine a day for the first
5 days (which is usually split up into 4 servings
of 5 grams), and they consume that alongside
20-30 grams of simple sugar in each serving,
and you end up with an extra 300-600 daily
calories from pure sugar alone.
And secondly, it’s simply a made up problem
created by shady supplement companies in order
to sell you new “advanced” forms of creatine.
You’ll basically see the whole “doesn’t
cause bloating” selling point for virtually
every single creatine produt out there, including
creatine ethyl ester, buffered creatine, creatine
serum, creatine hydrochloride, these are all
examples of products that are promoted in
this way.
The truth is that it’s nothing more than
marketing hype designed to push over-priced
creatines that are equally or even less effective
than standard creatine monohydrate.
So, don’t allow these false myths to hold
you back.
Creatine is a safe and effective supplement
for those who are looking to maximize their
muscle gains and their gym performance, and
creatine monohydrate is still the best form
available.
Unless you fall into the “creatine non-responder”
category, which does affect anywhere from
maybe 15 up to as high as 30% of the population,
then creatine will increase your strength
and power, it will volumize muscle cells and
increase lean muscle growth, and all without
causing any subcutaneous water retention or
so-called “bloating”.
My suggestion is to stick to a product that
uses “Creapure” creatine monohydrate as
the source, as that will ensure that you’re
getting the highest grade of creatine possible,
and I will link one product in the description
box that does use Creapure creatine, but you
can use any brand that you want.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found the information useful here today.
If you did enjoy the video as always please
make sure to hit the “like” button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
the icon at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
So thanks for watching this video and I’ll
talk to you again soon.