Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here of EliteImpactLabs.com.
In this video, I just wanted to show you guys
basically just some training footage that
I kind of had laying around, it's from a few
months back.
And it's demonstrating a high intensity technique
called, "Multi-rep rest-pausing."
Now, for the most part, I generally don't
recommend using specific high-intensity techniques
like pre-exhaustion, or super-sets, or drop
sets or anything like that.
Unless you are a relatively advanced lifter
and you really know what you're doing, if
you're a beginner to intermediate, there's
really no need to include these types of techniques
in your workout plan, because training either
to concentric failure or one or two rep short
to failure is easily going to be enough.
And it's going to allow you to perform more
overall volume, which is going to translate
to better overall progress.
But I did have this footage here, so, I thought
I would share it with you.
Again, this technique is called, "Multi-rep
rest-pausing."
There's a variety of different ways that you
can use this technique.
But the way that I'm demonstrating today is
where a set is taken to concentric muscular
failure, then you're going to rest about 10
to 15 seconds, you're going to go to failure
again.
Then you're going to rest another 10 to 15
seconds, and then go to failure one more time.
So, it's actually a very difficult technique
to use.
It's very high intensity.
And again, I wouldn't recommend using this,
unless you are relatively advanced.
If you're an intermediate, again, if you want
to just throw something like this in from
time-to-time, that's fine.
If you're a beginner I definitely wouldn't
bother with it.
But it's just kind of something that you can
use every once in a while, just to kind of
add -- add something new to your workout.
Now, I wouldn't recommend using this for exercises
like squats, or deadlifts or bent over rows
like big power movements.
The clip I'm going to show you is a clip of
a inclined hammer press -- oh, sorry, flat
hammer press.
Using machines or bars, any kind of cable
system, these are all very good for this technique
because it's very easy for you to kind of
pause and resume your set really quickly.
You know, if you're using dumbbells or even
barbells in some cases, it takes a lot of
effort to kind of re-rack and unrack the weight.
So, machines are really good for this.
And again, I wouldn't recommend this for power
movements, but you can use this for chest,
you can use it for pull-down movements, machine
rows, bicep curls, you can use it for overhead
presses, triceps, calves, pretty much most
muscle groups.
Again, like I said, I will just avoid using
it for the big power movement.
So, I'll show you that -- that training clip
right now.
So, there isn't really a whole lot to give
in terms of commentary for this particular
exercise.
Again, the basic idea here is that you are
aiming to hit concentric muscular failure
three times within a basically a single extended
set.
So, you are going to want to go a little bit
higher rep than normal on this.
I mean, you don't want to be doing five reps
on your first set, because by the time you
get to the second and third phase, your strength
is going to be completely zapped.
So, I would say for this particular exercise,
probably a minimum of about seven reps for
the first set, anywhere up to, you could go
as high as 10 to 12, it just depends.
I think on this first set here, I got to seven
reps, and again, this is a to failure technique.
So, for each particular phase, you want to
go to concentric muscular failure which is
the point where you can't perform another
rep in proper form despite your best efforts.
So, for me, the way I approach it is I'll
typically go into the last rep.
It's extremely difficult to where I know that
I'm not going to get the next rep.
But if I know for sure, I'm not going to get
that next rep, then, I don't bother doing
it.
So, for me, that's concentric failure right
there.
So, that's the first phase done.
The resting periods can vary.
There's no one set absolute guideline.
I go with about 15 seconds.
You can go a little bit shorter.
You can go a little bit longer.
Some people go with breaths as well.
They'll say, do your set and then wait 12
to 15 breaths.
That's another option.
But I like to go with the 15-second guideline,
because it's a little bit more exact.
So then, here's the second phase.
I find it for me that my strength gets zapped
quite a bit by the second set.
It doesn't carry over very well like I can't
perform a lot of reps after I've already gone
to failure once.
So, I did seven on the first.
And I think I do -- well, we'll find out.
I don't even remember.
So, I did finished two reps there.
There's no chance I'm getting a third rep.
So, that's the end of the second phase.
And then again, I'm just going to rest another
roughly 15 seconds, and finished it up with
a third phase here.
So, again, this is something you want to use
sparingly.
I wouldn't recommend using it like multiple
times in a single workout for a given muscle
group.
Definitely you want to use that just once
per workout for a given muscle group.
And it's -- again, it's something you want
to use just every now and then if you are
an intermediate or more advanced lifter.
So, here's the final phase here.
And I think I didn't even get this rep here,
but I almost got it.
The handles on this machine start pretty far
back.
So, it's hard to get out of that bottom position.
So, yes, I didn't quite get that first rep,
but almost.
So, again, this is a technique that I would
recommend using sparingly.
If you're a beginner, you're definitely not
going to need to bother with it.
But if you are an intermediate or more advanced
lifter and you want a high intensity technique
to add in from time to time just to kind of
change things up, multi-rep rest-pausing is
definitely one of my favorite overall high-intensity
techniques available.
I'm not a big fan for drop sets.
Not a big fan of supersets.
Not a fan of pre-exhaustion, but multi-rep
rest-pausing is one thing that I will add
into my workouts every now and then just for
something different.
So, I hope you found this training clip here
useful today.
As always, if you enjoy the video, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
all of our future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide, which you can grab from
EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook.
The link for that is also in the description
box for daily videos, articles, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.