Hey, what's up? This is Sean Nalewanyj, of
EliteImpactLabs.com. And today, I'm going
to be explaining to you how to set up your
own home gym, and execute an effective muscle
building workout from home. Now, personally,
I think working out from home is great. My
first two years of training where the bulk
of my initial transformation was made, was
done in my basement with nothing more than
a few very basic pieces of equipment. Now,
your reasons for wanting to build muscle at
home could be any number of things. Maybe
you're on a tight budget right now, and you
want to save the gym membership cost. Maybe
you have a busy schedule, and you want to
save time by working out at home, or maybe
you're a complete beginner, and for whatever
reason you feel uncomfortable training in
a regular gym setting at the moment. Whatever
your reason is don't worry. Training from
home can be equally effective. And it actually
affords you several advantages as well. You
know, you don't have to worry about travel
time to and from the gym. You can listen to
any kind of music you want, as loud as you
want, and not have to worry about bothering
anybody around you. You can make as much noise
as you want. And when your workout is over,
you can just sprawl out on the floor and know
that your couch, and your kitchen, and your
TV or whatever else is just a few steps away.
Now, all that said, if you really want to
make some serious gains, you're going to need
to invest in the proper setup. Body weight
exercises without any equipment at all can
have their place in the very beginning, but
they're not a solution to long-term muscle
size and strength gains. A pair of 10lbs dumbbells
and some rubber tubing, that's also not going
to cut it. Nor will any fancy, you know, workout
gizmos or, you know, fancy contraptions that
you might have seen on the 3:00am infomercials.
What I'm talking about here is a legit home
gym setup for maximizing muscle growth and
strength gains. And at the end of this video,
I'll also link you to a free step-by-step
home workout that you can execute with your
new equipment. Now, the good news is that
it's actually pretty straightforward. And
it doesn't require the use of anything fancy
or overly expensive. If you want to build
muscle at home as effectively as possible,
here is the basic equipment that you're going
to need. So, the first is a barbell and free
weight plates. Now, this is one piece of equipment
alone is going to allow you to perform an
almost endless number of very effective muscle
building exercises. Rather than settling for
cheap plastic weights, go with the high quality
cast iron set, because that's going to last
you over the long run. And this is very important.
Also make sure that you purchase enough weight,
so that you can continually progress from
week to week. Remember that the entire basis
of achieving continual muscle growth is progressive
overload. And if you outgrow your weight set,
your muscle gains are going to completely
stagnated. The second piece is adjustable
dumbbells. Now, this includes two individual
dumbbell handles, weight plates and locks,
so that you can manually set the dumbbell
weight on your own. This is obviously, you
know, a lot more efficient and cost-effective
than buying an entire set of static dumbbells.
I don't know too many people who did that.
And, you know, you can actually try to find
a complete weight set that includes the barbell,
and the dumbbell handles and the weight plates
all together in a single package. The third
piece you're going to need is a bench with
incline adjustments. A sturdy, high quality
bench is a must have for performing your bench
presses, your overhead dumbbell presses and
other seated movements. Again, make sure you
go with the bench that has an incline adjustment,
and it also has safety catches if you're planning
on training alone. The fourth piece is a chin-up
bar. You know, a simple $15 to $25 chin-up
bar that attaches to your doorframe will work
just fine. And that's very important for performing
your vertical pulling movements, such as your
overhand and your underhand chin-ups. And
the fifth piece is a squat rack. Now, this
is admittedly a kind of tricky piece of equipment
to get a hold of, because a full squat rack
can be pricey. However, if you're training
at home without machines, and you want to
achieve that absolute best leg development
possible, then basic free weight squats are
an irreplaceable movement. If you don't have
the money or available space for a squat rack,
then you're just going to need to be creative.
The bottom line is that you need some sort
of setup that allows you to safely unrack
a loaded bar, perform a set of squats, and
then either re-rack the bar or drop the weight
onto a safety catch or onto the floor. You
should never, ever perform squats unless you
have a safe place to drop the bar in case
your strength gives out. Certain types of
squat racks also have a chin-up bar built
in. So you can kill two birds with one stone
if you do buy them. Now, if you honestly have
no way of performing barbell squats at home
or if in all honestly if you're just not trying
to absolutely maximize your muscle gains,
then you can definitely still get by with
other movements like dumbbell squats, or dumbbell
lunges or dumbbell step-ups, barbell step
up, et cetera. A final addition to your home
gym is an apparatus for performing wide grip
dips. This could be -- either be an actual
dip stand or you could just use another creative
solution like the back of two sturdy chairs,
the corner of a countertop, et cetera. Wide
grip dips are a hugely effective movement
for developing your chest. And if you can
find a way to perform them, then I definitely
would recommend it. So, there you have it.
The five or optionally six pieces of equipment
that you need to setup an effective home gym
and build muscle at home. A barbell and dumbbells
with weight plates, an adjustable bench, a
chin-up bar, a squat rack, and optionally
a dip stand. As long as you invest in these
basic tools, you can execute an equally effective
muscle building workout without ever joining
a regular gym. So, I hope you found this video
useful. If you want to get your hands on a
complete muscle building workout plan that
you can either use at the gym or from home,
make sure to check out the "No Fail" system
over on EliteImpactLabs.com. The link is in
the description bar for that. Also make sure
to join the Elite Impact Lab's Facebook page,
where we do free supplement giveaways every
Sunday night. And make sure to subscribe to
stay up-to-date on all of my future videos.
And one final tip, don't perform your barbell
curls next to your fish tank. Talk to you
again soon. Mama, ma, ma. I know, I know.
I know.