Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
SeanNal.com and BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in today's video lesson I just want to
go over 5 popular bodybuilding supplements
that I would suggest you steer clear of.
You work hard for your money and you should
spend that money on things in your muscle
building or fat loss program that actually
matter such as your gym membership, proper
foods and supplements that actually produce
results.
Now I found that some people tend to react
defensively when you tell them that a particular
supplement they've been using, perhaps for
years on end, is probably a waste of money
but just remember that the information that
is being presented here today is here to help
you and it's here to give you the opportunity
to divert that money onto something more useful.
So here we go.
The first supplement on the list today are
testosterone boosters.
So the reality behind this one is pretty simple
and straightforward.
Aside from the use of actual anabolic steroids,
there's really no way for you to increase
your testosterone levels to any significant
degree via natural supplementation.
So, tribulus, d-aspartic acid, longjack, avena
sativa, these products might provide a very
small boost to your bottom line test levels,
although d-aspartic acid is the only one with
any real good supportive research behind it,
but it's not going to be anywhere near the
several hundred to 1000 plus percent that
is necessary to create positive effects on
strength or muscle growth.
Most people tend to totally overlook the fact
that boosting testosterone in and of itself
really doesn't mean anything at all.
Not only does testosterone have to be boosted
but it also has to be boosted to a level that's
high enough to directly enhance muscle hypertrophy
and gym performance.
And as of right now, there's nothing you're
going to find on the shelves of your local
supplement store that is going to accomplish
that for you.
The second supplement on the list is L-Glutamine.
Though many bodybuilders swear by L-Glutamine,
the concrete research on glutamine supplementation
is pretty extensive and very unexciting.
First off, a huge chunk of orally consumed
L-glutamine never even makes it into your
muscles at all and is instead used up by your
intestines for energy.
The percentage here is going to vary but it
has been shown to be as high as 65 percent.
Secondly, around 10 percent of your total
protein intake is already made up of L-glutamine.
So that means that if you're consuming 150
grams of protein per day you're already taking
in 15 grams of L-glutamine right there.
And don't make the mistake of assuming that
if some is good then more must automatically
be better.
Thirdly, virtually all of the standard claims
that are made about L-glutamine's bodybuilding
effects, and this ranges all over the map
from increased protein synthesis to enhanced
immune system function, to improved growth
hormone levels as well as faster glycogen
replenishment post workout.
All of these claims have been debunked over
a wide range of studies.
Third supplement on the list today is L-Arginine.
The basic idea behind "N02 products" is to
increase oxygen delivery and blood flow into
your muscles in order to increase nutrient
uptake and give you what's called a permanent
pump that lasts all throughout the day.
These products are usually based off of different
forms of the amino acid L-arginine, with L-arginine
alpha-ketoglutarate being the most widely
form used.
Now this is a great gig for dishonest supplement
companies out there because L-arginine itself
is a dirt cheap ingredient and it can be very
easily added to pre-workout formulas and other
products in order to hype up the labels and
to keep production costs down.
But unfortunately for you as the consumer,
there is currently zero research that shows
a positive relationship between L-arginine
supplements and increases in nitric oxide
or muscular performance.
After that we have weight gain powders.
Now this is a little bit of a gray area because
although there's nothing inherently wrong
with consuming a weight gain powder in controlled
amounts, as long as you're tracking what you're
taking in, just keep in mind that most weight
gain powders are really nothing more than
a basic mix of whey protein and simple sugar.
A far more nutritious and better tasting option
is to just purchase a whey protein powder
on its own and then just go ahead and blend
in your own carbohydrates and your own healthy
fats.
So you can use oatmeal, fruit, natural nut
butters and healthy oils like flaxseed oil
or extra virgin olive oil.
These are all great options.
This is going to give you the high calorie
density that you're after while still providing
your body with a good dose of vitamins, mineral,
phytonutrients and fiber rather than a bunch
of nutritionally void sugar in its place.
And last on the list are "advanced" forms
of creatine.
Now this is a huge one.
Creatine is the most widely researched and
most result-producing muscle building compound
in existence and is most commonly sold in
the form of creatine monohydrate.
And over the last decade or so, supplement
companies have been coming out with all kinds
of different forms of "breakthrough" creatines
that are supposedly more effective than the
original monohydrate form.
And this includes many different types, creatine
ethyl ester, creatine HCL, buffered creatine,
creatine nitrate, etcetera.
But don't let the marketing hype fool you
when it comes to these products because not
a single study has ever been performed that
has shown any of these "advanced" forms of
creatine to deliver any benefits above and
beyond the basic monohydrate form.
In fact, several studies have actually shown
certain forms, such as creatine ethyl ester,
to actually be directly inferior.
Creatine monohydrate is safe, it's free of
side effects, it does not cause cramps or
bloating like some companies claim and it's
highly absorbable as well.
And you really can't get much better than
that.
Not only that but creatine monohydrate is
also the most cost effective form as well.
Virtually all of the new and improved creatines
that you run into are going to cost you about
5 to 10 times the price of monohydrate for
a product that delivers equal or even worse
effects.
If you want to obtain all of the benefits
that creatine has to offer just stick with
3 to 5 grams per day of a high quality, creapure
creatine monohydrate product.
So if you want to save a good chunk of money
and divert that money onto things that are
actually going to benefit your bodybuilding
and fat loss program and just your life in
general, I would highly recommend that you
steer clear of the 5 supplements that I've
just outlined as they're likely doing nothing
more than thinning out your wallet.
Supplementation can be a useful way to fully
optimize your training performance and your
bottom line results, but just keep in mind
that there are a lot more crappy products
out there than there are good ones.
And if you want to get a complete breakdown
of my specific supplementation recommendations
then you can check out my complete fitness
supplementation guide which I'll link in the
description box below.
So thanks very much for watching this video
lesson today.
If you did enjoy the video and found the information
useful please make sure to hit the Like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up to
date on future video lessons.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com, the link for
that is in the description box below, and
make sure to join the Facebook page for daily
tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box below.
Talk to you again soon.