What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and today
I want to make a video explaining why, I think,
when it all comes down to it, dirty bulking
is just flat out stupid to put it simply.
And why I would strongly recommend that you
focus on building muscle slowly and gradually,
and making lean gains while keeping your body
fat gains under control.
And the simple reason for that is that as
a natural trainee muscle growth itself is
a slow and gradual process no matter what
you do.
And eating more and more food is not going
to magically speed up the process.
I’ve said this a million times before but
keep in mind that there is a maximum cap on
how much lean muscle your body is capable
of building in a given day, or week, or month.
And it only takes a relatively small calorie
surplus in order to reach that cap, and once
that’s been reached any calories that you
consume beyond that point are just going to
be stored as body fat.
So in that respect, dirty bulking really has
nothing to do with improving muscle growth
and it’s really nothing more than blatant
over eating when it all comes down to it.
I mean, you literally just stuffing your face
and making yourself fat.
Now, if you are perfectly aware of that and
you just find dirty bulking to be fun and
you like eating all the extra food, you genuinely
don’t mind being fat while you’re bulking
and you’re okay with dieting and off later
on then obviously that’s your choice and
it’s not up to me to tell you that it’s
wrong and you shouldn’t do it.
There are more advanced bodybuilders out there
who do consciously dirty bulk just for the
sake of it.
But for the vast majority of lifters out there,
for the vast majority of people out there
who do dirty bulk, they’re doing it for
the wrong reasons.
And it’s usually because they think it’s
helping them reach their goals faster when,
if anything, it’s actually slowing the results
in the long run.
And that’s because for every pound of extra
body fat that you gain while you’re dirty
bulking that’s going to represent about
one week or so of dieting that you’re going
to need to do later on in order to get rid
of it.
And not only can dieting for fat loss be a
tedious process in and off itself, I don’t
think it’s fun for anyone, but that time
that you’re spending in a calorie deficit
to diet off the fat is also time that you
could otherwise used to continue gaining muscle
if you hadn’t allow yourself to get so fat
in the first place.
So if you gain twelve pounds of extra body
fat while bulking that you really didn’t
need to, and that’s not uncommon at all
and there are guys who gain a lot more than
that, but that’s going to be anywhere from
about two to three months that you’re going
to need to spend in a calorie deficit going
through entire unnecessary fat loss cycle
when you could’ve just stayed leaner and
avoid it altogether.
Or at least reduce the time frame way down
to maybe a small mini cut for a few weeks
rather than a full blown fat loss diet.
So even if dirty bulking did allow you to
built a very small amount of extra muscle
on a week-to-week basis just by fully guaranteeing
that you’re getting enough calories to maximize
hypertrophy a hundred percent, in the long
run you’ll probably still gain less muscle
in comparison to clean bulking because of
all the wasted time that you’ll need to
spend dieting the fat off.
So that’s one big reason why I don’t recommend
dirty bulking.
And then on top of that is the simple fact
that if you start your muscle building program
and then just start eating everything in sight,
and you put on an amount of body fat that
you’re not happy with, that can really easily
cause you to lose motivation and to fall off
track and to lose the desire to keep bulking.
Even though you hadn’t gain that much actual
lean muscle in the first place.
So now you have to reverse gears, start cutting,
and then you just fall into this goofy, never
ending bulking and cutting loop and never
really getting anywhere, and this something
that I see all the time.
Or if you do decide to keep bulking even though
your body fat is getting fairly high, you’re
just not going to look or feel good in general.
I mean, why get blatantly fat and spend a
good portion of the year being unhappy with
your physique when you could’ve just stuck
to a lean bulk and continued gaining size
and strength while staying lean and while
looking good all year round.
It just doesn’t make sense in my view.
So, to put it simply by clean bulking as opposed
to dirty bulking, you’ll still build muscle
just as fast and probably even faster in the
overall picture, you’ll look good, and stay
relatively lean all year round, you’ll feel
physically and mentally better, and you’ll
either eliminate or hugely reduce the need
for a fat loss diet, depending on what sort
of look you are going for.
Now, in terms of actually caring out a lean
bulk it’s really just a matter of controlling
the size of your calorie surplus and keeping
it on the smaller to more moderate side.
So as an estimate, if you’re a beginner
then somewhere around three hundred calories
above maintenance per day would be about right.
Intermediate can go with a smaller surplus
of around two hundred, and more advance trainees
would want to go even lower, maybe as low
as a hundred or so on average per day depending
on how advance they are.
These are just estimates, of course, because
there’s no single surplus that’s going
to suit everybody perfectly because of a huge
variety of factor like your genetics and how
program is set up, but somewhere around those
figures would be about right.
And going with these huge surpluses of five
hundred or seven hundred and fifty, or even
a thousand calories above maintenance is totally
unnecessary for the majority of trainees out
there.
And it’s probably going to hurt you in the
long run.
And to make sure that your overall surplus
is within reasonable limits, keep in mind
that for beginners roughly half a pound of
total body weight gain per week would be appropriate.
Just to make sure that you’re not gaining
fat too quickly.
I’d say about three pounds per month would
be the absolute most.
And that your rate of muscle gain should slow
down by approximately fifty percent for every
year of proper training that you have under
your belt.
The keyword there being proper training.
Again, that’s just an estimate but it’s
a rough ballpark that you can keep in mind
just in order to gauge thing for yourself.
So, I hope this was helpful.
If you want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to lay all of this
out from A to Z, and maximize your muscle
gains while staying lean year round.
The workouts, the meal plans and the few basic
supplements then you can check out my Body
Transformation Blueprint, it will show everything
you need to know.
You can click here for that or head over to
www.BodyTransformationTruth.com the link is
in the description.
Make sure that you follow me on social media
here if you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
if you enjoyed the video, feel free to share
it, hit the like button, comment and subscribe
if you haven’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.