Within the fitness world, there seem to 
be diverse opinions on how many sets a  
person should perform to build muscle optimally.
On one end of the spectrum, some believe a 
low number of sets are sufficient, with some  
even proposing 1 set of repetitions to failure 
per exercise is all you need to build muscle.
On the other end of the spectrum, 
others suggest that so long as  
you can successfully recover from 
it, more sets mean more stimulus,  
thus the higher number of sets you can 
perform the better for muscle growth.
However, what does scientific research say?
Before exploring the research, it's useful to get 
some definitions and technical points out the way.
In this video, a set is defined as a 
bout of repetitions between 8 and 12,  
performed 3 or fewer repetitions 
from the point of failure.  
This is what pretty much all the research 
we'll explore in this video used as a set.
Furthermore, in this video, 
we'll actually be exploring  
how many weekly sets you may want to 
be performing for each muscle group.
Any exercise that involves a muscle group as  
a prime mover will count towards 
that muscles group's weekly sets.
For example, in a compound 
exercise like the bench press,  
the chest, triceps, and deltoid muscles are 
prime movers. Thus, one set on the bench press  
will count towards 1 set for the chest, 1 set 
for the triceps, and 1 set for the deltoids.
Also, any isolation exercises 
that target a specific muscle  
group will of course count towards 
that muscle group's weekly set count.  
For instance, 1 set on the triceps skull crusher 
will count towards 1 set for your triceps.
Okay, let us now explore the research on 
how many weekly sets you should perform  
per muscle group to maximize muscle hypertrophy.
Kicking things off, the results from a 
meta-analysis by Schoenfeld et al. seem  
to indicate that the more sets performed for a 
muscle group per week, the more muscle growth.
Based on data from 15 studies,  
each additional weekly set was associated 
with an 0.37% increase in muscle size.
Furthermore, performing 9 or more weekly 
sets for a muscle group produced more  
muscle hypertrophy than fewer than 9 weekly sets.
However, there are two important 
considerations with this meta-analysis.
Firstly, the majority of the studies included did  
not have subjects perform more than 
9-12 weekly sets for a muscle group.
Secondly, the majority of the studies were also 
conducted on previously untrained individuals.
As a result, probably the most accurate 
takeaway from this analysis is that for  
beginners, performing 9-12 weekly sets per 
muscle group is likely better than fewer.
This is probably a solid takeaway for beginners.  
9-12 weekly sets is probably an 
ideal amount of work for them.
We know that beginners gain the 
fastest rate of muscle and strength,  
but they also experience the most muscle 
damage and longest recovery durations.  
Thus, performing more than 9-12 weekly 
sets may not be necessary for them.
However, what about once a beginner 
gains a good degree of experience,  
and what about individuals with 
numerous training years of experience?
Could performing more than 9-12 weekly sets for 
trained individuals benefit muscle hypertrophy?
As far as I'm aware, there have 
been 6 studies exploring this.  
3 of them essentially indicate the more sets the 
better, while the other 3 suggest there's a point  
where further weekly sets provide no further 
benefit or even regression for hypertrophy.
Let us briefly examine these 
6 studies in hope of finding  
reasons that could explain 
the overall mixed results.
We'll first examine the 3 studies 
that find more sets to be better.
Brigatto et al. had 27 men with an 
average of 3.5 years of training  
experience either train their muscle 
groups with 16, 24, or 32 weekly sets.
All groups distributed their sets 
over two non-consecutive days a week,  
and training lasted 8 weeks.
50% of the weekly sets for a muscle 
group were from compound exercises,  
with the remaining 50% coming 
from isolation exercises.
Also, 60-second rest intervals were 
used between sets in a session.
Increases in biceps, triceps, and vastus 
lateralis thickness were greatest for the  
subjects performing 32 weekly 
sets for their muscle groups.
Radaelli et al. had 48 men with 
previous calisthenics experience  
train their biceps with either 6, 
18, or 30 weekly sets. Moreover,  
subjects either trained their triceps 
with 9, 27, or 45 weekly sets.
All groups distributed their sets over 
three non-consecutive days a week,  
and training lasted 6 months.
For their biceps, 50% of the weekly 
sets were from compound exercises,  
while the remaining 50% was 
from isolation exercises.
For the triceps, 2/3 of the sets 
were from compound exercises,  
while 1/3 were from isolation exercises.
Also, 90-120 seconds of rest was 
given between sets in a session.
Increases in biceps and triceps thickness favored 
performing the highest number of weekly sets.
Schoenfeld et al. had 34 men with an average of 
4.4 years of training experience perform either 6,  
18, or 30 weekly sets for 
their biceps and triceps.  
Moreover, subjects either trained their 
quadriceps with 9, 27, or 45 weekly sets.
All groups distributed their sets over 
three non-consecutive days a week,  
and training lasted for 8 weeks.
For the biceps and triceps, 100% of the 
weekly sets were from compound exercises.  
For the quadriceps, 2/3 of the 
weekly sets were from compound  
exercises, with the remaining 
1/3 from isolation exercises.
Also, 90 seconds of rest was 
given between sets in a session.
Increases in biceps, triceps, rectus femoris,  
and lateral thigh thickness favored 
performing the highest number of weekly sets.
So, these three studies we've just 
overviewed indicate between 30-45  
weekly sets for a muscle group are 
beneficial for muscle hypertrophy.
Let us now briefly detail the 3 
other studies that oppose this,  
and then figure out why this could be.
Heaselgrave et al. had 49 men 
with at least 1 year of training  
experience train their biceps with 
either 9, 18, or 27 weekly sets.
The subjects that performed 9 weekly 
sets performed this all in one session,  
while the subjects that performed 
18 or 27 weekly sets distributed  
it over two non-consecutive days 
a week. Training lasted 6 weeks.
2/3 of the weekly sets were from compound 
exercises, with the rest from isolation exercises.
Also, 3 minutes of rest between 
sets was used in a session.
Increases in biceps thickness seem to favor the 
group performing 18 weekly sets for the biceps,  
suggesting this is an optimal 
number of weekly sets.
Ostrowski et al. had 35 men with between 
1-4 years of training experience train  
their triceps with either 
7, 14, or 28 weekly sets.
All subjects distributed their weekly sets 
over two non-consecutive days per week,  
and training lasted 10 weeks.
70% of the weekly sets were 
from compound exercises,  
with the remaining 30% from isolation exercises.
Also, 3 minutes of rest between 
sets was used in a session.
Increases in triceps thickness were similar 
between the subjects performing 14 and 28  
weekly sets, and both were greater than the 
subjects performing 7 weekly sets. Therefore,  
this data suggest 14 weekly sets is sufficient, 
with extra sets providing no further benefit.
Finally, Aube et al. had 35 men 
with at least 3 years of training  
experience train their quadriceps 
with either 12, 18, or 24 weekly sets.
All subjects distributed their weekly sets 
over two non-consecutive days per week,  
and training lasted 8 weeks.
100% of the weekly sets were 
from compound exercises.
Also, 2 minutes of rest between 
sets was used in a session.
Increases in anterior thigh thickness at two 
regions were statistically similar between  
all three weekly set groups. Indicating 
that 12 weekly sets may be sufficient.
So, these three studies collectively indicate 
that between 12-18 weekly sets may be sufficient,  
or perhaps even optimal (in the case of the 
Heaselgrave et al. study), for building muscle.
Why might these 3 studies conflict 
with the other 3 studies that suggest  
more weekly sets result in 
more muscle hypertrophy?
There are three potential 
hypotheses I can think of.
Firstly, perhaps individual differences 
explain the conflicting results.  
More specifically, the optimal number of 
weekly sets may be highly individualized.  
The 3 studies that found more sets to be better 
might have predominantly recruited subjects that  
respond favorably to a high number of weekly 
sets, while the other 3 studies may not have.
To some degree, I think part of this hypothesis 
is true. That is, it's probably very likely that  
certain individuals respond better to a high or 
lower number of weekly sets for a muscle group.
However, this might not be 
the only thing going on,  
as we'll see with the second and third hypotheses.
The second hypothesis, relating to rest intervals,  
might actually be a very strong hypothesis 
that could explain the divergent results.
More precisely, the 3 studies that 
found more sets to be better seemed  
to predominantly have subjects rest 60-90 
seconds between their sets in a session.  
Put differently, they used short rest intervals.
In contrast, the 3 studies that found 12-18 
weekly sets per muscle group to be sufficient  
or optimal had subjects rest 2-3 
minutes between sets in a session.  
In other words, they used long rest intervals.
The reason this is potentially significant 
is that the research seems to indicate using  
long rest intervals makes each set 
more effective for building muscle.
We've explored this in-depth 
in our rest interval video.  
However, let us briefly detail a study by Longo et 
al. that demonstrates this concept extremely well.
They found that when performing 3 sets of 
repetitions to failure with an 80% one-rep  
max load on a leg press, resting for 3 
minutes between sets produced greater  
increases in quadriceps cross-sectional area 
versus resting for 1 minute between sets.
However, when subjects performed 4 to 
5 sets of repetitions to failure with  
an 80% one-rep max load and used 
1 minute of rest between sets,  
quadriceps cross-sectional area increases were 
similar to performing 3 sets of repetitions to  
failure with an 80% one-rep max load and 
using 3 minutes of rest between sets.
Therefore, this study nicely demonstrates 
that longer rest intervals make each set  
more effective for building muscle. If you 
use shorter rest intervals between sets,  
you have to perform more sets to receive 
similar growth to using longer rest intervals.
Now, it should be noted that a leg press, a 
compound exercise, was used in this study.  
This conclusion we've just made seems to 
be only relevant to compound exercises,  
the research on rest intervals with 
isolation exercises is far from clear.
Nevertheless, many compound exercises were 
used in the studies explored in this video,  
and perhaps this logic explains the results.
Given longer rest intervals 
make each set more effective,  
it perhaps makes sense that the 
3 studies that used longer rest  
intervals found 12-18 weekly sets per 
muscle group to be sufficient or optimal.
Conversely, given shorter rest intervals 
require you to perform a higher number of  
sets to receive the equivalent muscle 
growth to using longer rest intervals,  
it makes sense that the three studies that used 
short rest intervals found that up to 30 to 45  
weekly sets per muscle group provided 
more benefit for muscle hypertrophy.
Of course, it's important to 
recognize this is only a hypothesis.  
However, I personally believe it's a pretty strong 
hypothesis and may indeed explain the results.
However, the third hypothesis,  
relating to training frequency, adds a further 
twist to our interpretation of the evidence.
The 3 studies that found 12-18 weekly sets to 
be sufficient or optimal for building muscle  
all had subjects distribute their weekly sets 
for a muscle group over only 2 days a week.
It's possible there could exist a limit 
to the number of sets you can perform for  
a muscle group per session, meaning that the 
highest number of set groups in these studies,  
which we know performed around 24-28 weekly 
sets per muscle group, might have experienced  
more muscle growth if they distributed their 
weekly sets across more than two days a week.
However, does a limit to the number of sets you  
can perform for a muscle group 
each session actually exist?
One factor we might have to consider here is the 
one we've just mentioned: rest interval durations.
It's likely that if a limit to the number 
of sets you can perform per session exists,  
it would be lower when using longer rest interval 
durations compared to using short rest intervals  
durations, because as we've mentioned, longer 
rest intervals make each set more effective.
In the three studies that found 30-45 weekly sets 
per muscle group produced more muscle growth,  
we know they used short rest intervals.
Moreover, they had subjects distribute their 
weekly sets over two to three days each week.  
In essence, this meant that the subjects 
performing 30-45 weekly sets per muscle  
group were performing 15-16 sets 
for a muscle group each session.
As the subjects that did this experienced the most 
growth compared to others performing fewer sets,  
we can potentially conclude that performing 
15-16 sets per muscle group each session  
is within any potential limit to the 
number of sets you can perform per  
session for a muscle group when 
using shorter rest intervals.
However, this information fails 
to help us understand what the  
limit could be when using longer rest intervals.
Unfortunately, there are no direct 
studies that can help us here.  
But, there are two studies that 
may somewhat give us clues.
A study by Ogasawara et al. subjected the 
gastrocnemius of rats to sets of 10 electrically  
induced muscle contractions, using 3 minutes of 
rest between sets (which is a long rest interval).
They found that muscle protein 
synthesis progressively increased  
up to performing 10 sets of this per session.  
However, muscle protein synthesis was 
less when performing 20 sets per session.
As a result, this data potentially suggests 
that the limit the number of sets you can  
perform per muscle group each session when using 
longer rest intervals lies between 10-20 sets.
Of course, two important limitations of this study 
are that rats were used, and only acute muscle  
protein synthesis measurements, not long-term 
muscle growth measurements, were explored.
Another study by Damas et al., conducted on 
humans, provides potential further insight.
They found that when performing 12 
sets for the quadriceps in one session,  
muscle protein synthesis increases seemed to have 
only been slightly greater compared to performing  
8 sets for the quadriceps in one session. 
They used 2-minute rest intervals between  
sets in this study (which is probably just 
about what we'd call a long rest interval).
As a result, this data potentially implies, when 
using longer rest intervals, performing 12 or more  
sets per muscle group each session may not result 
in much further benefit, indicating this could  
be near or at the limit to the number of sets 
you can perform per muscle group each session.
Of course, a limitation is that only acute 
muscle protein synthesis measurements,  
not long-term muscle growth 
measurements, were assessed.
Nevertheless, returning to the 3 studies that 
found 12-18 weekly sets to be sufficient or  
optimal for building muscle, and used longer rest 
intervals, we know that the highest set groups in  
these studies, performing 24-28 weekly sets, 
distributed their sets across 2 days a week.
This means they performed roughly 12-14 sets 
for a muscle group each session, and this number  
is potentially at or past the potential limit 
indicated by the Ogasawara and Damas studies.  
Thus, perhaps if they distributed their weekly 
sets across 3 or more days a week, they would  
have experienced more muscle growth than the 
other groups performing fewer weekly sets.
Of course, it's important to recognize 
this is a hypothesis based on limited data.  
Ultimately, future direct research would be 
needed to truly prove if this is correct.
Before moving on to the 
final section of this video,  
let us briefly summarize our current 
conclusions to make everything crystal clear.
For beginners, 9-12 weekly sets per muscle 
group is probably near-ideal for them.
In more trained individuals, if you 
use longer rest intervals between sets  
(2 or more minutes), the current research 
potentially indicates between 12-18 weekly  
sets could be sufficient for muscle hypertrophy. 
However, there remains a possibility that more  
weekly sets could be better if you distribute 
your weekly sets across 3 or more days per week,  
but this remains a tentative conclusion until 
more direct future research explores this.
If you use shorter rest intervals between sets 
(90 seconds or less), it seems performing up  
to 30-45 weekly sets per muscle group could be 
beneficial, so long as you probably spread this  
volume across two or more days per week. However, 
I'm not too sure how practical this will actually  
be for most people. Performing 30-45 weekly sets 
for your muscle groups is likely going to require  
a substantial amount of training time. Moreover, 
due to the short rest intervals and numerous sets,  
doing this is likely going to be subjectively 
more fatiguing and tiring versus using longer rest  
intervals and performing fewer sets. If you think 
you can handle this, and it's something you'd  
like to try, go for it. Otherwise, it's probably 
best to use longer rest intervals and fewer sets.
Moving on to the final section of this 
video, for the majority of the viewers  
that are currently training, there's 
a good chance that you probably don't  
have to change your training based on 
the research recommendations presented.
Regardless of whether you are above, within, 
or below the weekly set recommendations,  
if you're making progress with 
your current training program,  
there's probably no need to change things.
On the other hand, and this is probably one 
of the more important sections of this video,  
if in the future (or now itself) you 
experience a plateau in muscle hypertrophy,  
or you're minimally responding 
to your program hypertrophy-wise,  
you may want to modestly increase the number 
of sets you perform for your muscle groups.
The reason I say this is because 
two studies demonstrate that  
increasing the number of sets you 
perform can probably be effective  
for spurring on more muscle hypertrophy in 
plateaued or low responding individuals.
A study by Aube et al., which is one study 
we've already overviewed in this video,  
demonstrates this.
As we noted, this study found in men with 
at least 3 years of training experience,  
there was no statistical difference in 
anterior thigh growth between performing 12,  
18, or 24 weekly sets for the quadriceps.
However, after the study, the researchers 
did something quite interesting.
They split the subjects, based on their results, 
into one of three groups: a low responder group,  
which contained subjects that grew the anterior 
thigh the least, a high responder group which  
contained subjects that grew the anterior thigh 
the most, and a moderate responder group which  
contained subjets that grew the anterior thigh 
to an extent between the other two groups.
Remember, the subjects of this study had at least  
3 years of training experience and were 
training before the study took place.
Fascinatingly, it seems that those 
that grew their anterior thigh the  
most in the high responder group had 
increased their weekly sets by the  
greatest number relative to what 
they were doing before the study.
Specifically, they were performing an 
average of 6 more weekly sets for the quads.  
For the moderate responders, they 
were performing an average of 4 more  
sets relative to what they were before 
the study, and for the low responders,  
they were only performing around 1-2 more sets 
than what they were doing before the study.
Therefore, this study indicates 
increasing the number of sets you  
perform can help further enhance 
the muscle growth you experience,  
and perhaps may be a useful tool to get 
past plateaus or aid low responders.
Now, in this study, the subjects 
experienced the most benefit by  
increasing the number of sets for a 
muscle group by roughly 6 per week.
However, larger jumps than this 
might not actually be better.
Scarpelli et al. illustrates this.
They recruited 16 men with at least 2 
years of training experience and had them  
train the unilateral (one-leg) 
leg extension and leg press.
With one leg, each subject individually performed  
20% more weekly sets for their quadriceps 
than what they were doing before the study.  
While with their other leg, all subjects 
performed a prescribed number of weekly  
sets for their quadriceps (this ended 
up being roughly 22 weekly sets).
After an 8-week training duration, increases 
in vastus lateralis cross-sectional area (were  
significantly greater for the leg that performed 
20% more weekly sets for their quadriceps.
Put differently, a progressive 
increase in weekly sets  
(20%) seems to be beneficial for muscle growth.
Now, here's an important point, 
for 8 out of 16 of the subjects,  
the prescribed number of weekly sets (again, 
roughly 22 weekly sets) was actually MORE than  
20% of the weekly sets they had been performing 
for their quadriceps prior to the study  
(it ranged from being 30% to 120% more 
weekly sets than usual for these subjects).
Yet, results still favored the 
leg that was only performing 20%  
more weekly sets. This finding emphasizes 
that larger jumps (30-120%) in weekly sets  
are not necessarily better than more modest 20% 
increases in weekly sets for muscle hypertrophy.
So, to summarize this final section of the video,  
if you consider yourself a low responder or 
you have plateaued, modestly increasing the  
number of weekly sets you perform for a muscle 
group (perhaps by 20%) may be of great benefit.
However, although this conclusion probably 
applies to many people, there are likely some  
individuals out there who contrastingly experience 
greater adaptations with lower weekly set numbers.
This study had 16 men and 18 women train 
the unilateral leg press and leg extension,  
with a 7-10 rep max load, three 
times per week for 12 weeks.
With one-leg, subjects trained 
each exercise with only one set,  
resulting in a total of 6 weekly sets for the 
quadriceps. With the other leg, they trained  
each exercise with three sets, resulting in 
a total of 18 weekly sets for the quadriceps.
Cross-sectional area of the quadriceps 
was measured before and after the study.
The graph on the screen shows the 
individual responses for each participant,  
with the Y-axis showing the cross-sectional 
area increases for the leg that trained each  
exercise with 3 sets, and the X-axis showing  
the cross-sectional area increases for the 
leg that trained each exercise with 1 set.
Quite a few participants demonstrated better 
gains when performing 3 sets per exercise,  
as you'd expect based on the research provided 
in this video. However, there were still a few  
subjects that responded slightly better 
with performing one set per exercise.  
This study nicely underscores the idea that 
individual differences without a doubt exist.
That brings us to the end of the 
video, let us summarize the video  
into a few key takeaway points 
to make everything crystal clear.
For beginners, 9-12 weekly sets per muscle group 
is probably sufficient for building muscle.
In more trained individuals, if you 
use long rest intervals between sets  
(2 or more minutes), 12-18 weekly sets 
per muscle group might be sufficient.  
However, although very tentative at this time, 
performing more than this could provide more  
muscle growth if you distribute your weekly 
sets across three or more days per week.
If you use short rest intervals between sets 
(90 seconds or less), up to 30-45 weekly sets  
per muscle group could be beneficial for muscle 
hypertrophy, provided these sets are distributed  
across 2 or more days per week. However, this 
is probably not practical or sustainable for  
most people, so perhaps you'd simply want to opt 
for using longer rest intervals with fewer sets.
For many individuals watching this that 
are currently training, so long as you  
are making progress, you definitely do not 
have to change anything based on this video.
However, once you hit a plateau, or if 
you consider yourself a low responder,  
you may wish to modestly increase the number 
of sets you perform per muscle group each week  
(probably by 20%), as this could be beneficial.
Finally, it's worth remembering 
individual differences are real.  
Some individuals out there might 
actually experience better muscle  
hypertrophy when performing a lower 
number of sets per muscle group.