All right, so if you're still a beginner at
the whole fitness thing, you're not happy
with the shape you're in right now, maybe
you're on the thinner side and you want to
put on some muscle, maybe you're overweight
and you want to lean down, or you're somewhere
in the middle and you want to do both, I know
that if you've never really been in great
shape before then it might seem like kind
of a lofty goal right now, there's a lot of
things you're trying to keep track of; figuring
out your calories, your macronutrients, food
choices, setting up a proper workout plan,
getting to the gym consistently, putting in
the actual effort during your training sessions,
tracking your progress, your supplements,
it definitely can feel a bit overwhelming
at the start.
I've been there myself.
You might be having a tough time, you might
be questioning whether or not it's even worth
it.
But one very important thing that you have
to keep in mind is that learning the ropes
in terms of building muscle and losing fat
is just like any other skill.
And once you've gone through that initial
grind and you've gotten accustomed to things,
you've learned about your body, you've built
up the proper habits, you've achieved some
decent muscle building and fat burning results,
it might be easy to just focus on the immediate
short-term game that you're gonna see, but
you also have to understand that by just putting
in the work for that initial year or two you're
literally setting yourself up for an entire
lifetime of benefits.
And the specific time frame it's gonna take
for each person to get to that point where
they really just get it in terms of training
and nutrition, and they've built a decent
physique, and everything is mostly on autopilot,
that time frame is gonna differ a bit it depends
on whether you're being exposed to the right
information and how closely you're dedicating
yourself to your plan, but I think in most
average cases probably somewhere between a
year or two if you're getting the right informatio,
that's all it takes to really get a solid
handle on things where training has just become
a normal part of life, probably something
you enjoy and look forward to, at least on
certain days of the week, and where nutrition
is mostly just automatic and is something
that you don't really have to think too much
about.
I mean, if you go about things properly you
should be able to gain roughly 50% of the
total muscle mass you're ever gonna build
just in that first year alone.
And then probably the second year will be
another 25%, so within one to two years you
can make a very solid transformation if you
stay consistent, and be right up around 75%
of your genetic limit.
And then the next year or two would be used
to fill in most of the remaining amount.
And not everyone is even trying to be as muscular
as possible, so if you're going for a leaner
more aesthetic look, then by the two-year
mark you might already be carrying an amount
of muscle that you're satisfied with.
And if you compare that to the scope of your
life as a whole, that's really not a long
time.
That's seven hundred and thirty days, and
it's a hundred and four weeks.
And then the other very important thing to
understand in this whole equation, is the
fact that maintaining your physique after
you've built it is a lot easier than the actual
process of building it from the ground up.
Not only because you'll have all the right
habits in place already so they're easier
to stick to but even just physiologically
as well, it doesn't require as heavy of a
training stimulus to keep your existing muscle
mass intact in comparison to initially building
it.
So once you've achieved a physique that you're
happy with, at that point if you want you
can be a quite a bit looser with your training
and your physique probably won't change that
much.
And then because of muscle memory if you do
happen to go off the rails a bit down the
line and fall off track a bit, which happens
to most people here and there, you're going
to be able to rebuild any muscle that you
might lose at a way faster pace than it took
to originally build it.
So, what I'm ultimately getting at here is
that, if you're in those beginner stages,
if you're thinking this is really hard, I'm
overwhelmed, I don't know if I can maintain
this, understand that there's a huge lifetime
ROI involved with just buckling down and putting
in the work for the first one to two years.
Even though it might seem challenging right
now, if you can just grind through and move
forward regardless, stick to your training
plan, stick to your nutrition plan, continue
researching so that you can expand your knowledge
further, that is going to massively benefit
you literally for the rest of your life, because
it really just gets easier and easier the
longer you've been doing this.
And once you've gone through those first couple
years, you'll always be in shape and have
a body that you're happy with moving forward.
You'll be healthier.
You'll be more confident and you'll have the
knowledge to easily get back in shape if you
do fall off track.
One to two years is not a long time to ask
for in the grand scheme.
There are a lot harder things in life than
going to the gym and eating well.
Those are things that will directly benefit
you not just physically but mentally as well,
so just go and do it, keep that bigger picture
in mind and understand that the effort you're
putting in right now is going to have a reverberating
effect ten, twenty, thirty, fifty years or
more down the line.
So, I hope this was helpful.
Like I mentioned before, having access to
the proper information is a critical aspect
of helping you learn the ropes as efficiently
as possible and maximizing your results in
those first couple of years, so if you do
want to grab a fully structured step-by-step
plan that lays out everything you need to
know in terms of training nutrition and supplementation
using a no BS science-based approach, I definitely
recommend checking out my Body Transformation
Blueprint program by clicking up here or visiting
www.BTBluePrint.com.
Definitely a resource that I wish I would
have had when I first started.
For those who are new to the channel, my brand
new science-based pre-workout fish oil and
multivitamin are also now available over at
www.RealScienceAthletics.com, the link is
in the description.
And make sure to hit the like button, leave
a comment, and subscribe below if you haven't
already, in order to stay up to date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.