What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video here I’m going to be explaining
how to properly transition from cutting to
bulking once your fatloss phase is over and
you’re ready to start building some more
muscle.
This is something that a lot of lifters don’t
do properly.
The main consequence being that they end up
putting on excessive amount of unwanted bodyfat
during that cut to bulk transition.
If you’ve put in the hard work and the discipline
to carry out a complete cutting phase right
to the end, you’ve dropped a good amount
of fat and reached your goal in terms of overall
leanness then you’ll want to make sure that
you handle this post dieting period with care
so that you don’t end up regressing and
erasing the progress that you’ve made.
So, how do you properly transition from cutting
to bulking while keeping bodyfat gains under
control?
First and foremost, if you’re serious about
doing this the right way then it’s very
important that you do have a concrete post
diet plan in place.
The reason being is that if you’ve been
in a calorie deficit over a prolong period
of time, you just start eating on instinct
as soon as your cut is over, based purely
on hunger and cravings, you’re pretty much
guaranteed to go overboard on total calories.
Remember that your body is really just a survival
machine when it all comes down to it.
It’s still programmed for a time when food
was scarce and it doesn’t care about your
desire for lean abs or, you know, delt arms
separation.
As far as your body is concerned, an ongoing
calorie deficit is basically equal to famine,
so as you remain in that deficit for longer
periods of time it will start making hormonal
adjustments both to conserve energy and to
motivate you to find food and eat.
So , important hormones that regulate your
hunger and fatloss like leptin, testosterone,
T3, those will all decrease and you’ll also
experienced a drop in what is called Non-exercise
Activity Thermogenesis or NEAT, for short.
And that basically refers to all the small
actions that you take throughout the day that
you probably don’t even think about.
So things like, fidgeting in your seat, tapping
your fingers, small head movements, and you
might think that those little movements don’t
really count for anything but the calories
burned from NEAT can pretty easily add up
to several hundred calories or more per day.
But the bottom line is that once your cut
is over your appetite and cravings will be
at their highest and your body will be physically
primed for maximum fat storage at the same
time.
And so that’s why eating purely on instinct
can very easily lead to large amounts of fat
gain over the course a few weeks and months.
And it’s also why so many people end up
regaining the weight that they’d lost on
their initial diet.
Now, when it comes to transitioning from cutting
to bulking, this usually gets exaggerated
even further because people will justify eating
those large amount of calories by saying that,
you know, since they’re bulking now their
body needs all of that extra food.
However, the reality is that it only takes
a small surplus of a few hundred extra calories
at most to maximize how much muscle your body
can build in a given day, and so any calories
that you’ve taken beyond that point are
just going to be stored as fat.
Now, if you’re going really high on calories
just for a couple days to reward yourself
after your cut is over then that’s not going
to do you much harm as long as it doesn’t
spiral out of control.
But all in all, the underlying approach of
your cut to bulk transition is to make sure
you increase your calories in controlled amounts
so that you can move back to your calorie
maintenance level and into a surplus without
going overboard.
Now, in terms of actually doing that, a lot
of people will recommend what’s called reverse
dieting, which is basically a method of increasing
your calories in small increments from week-to-week
until you get back to your calorie maintenance
level.
Reverse dieting does seem to make sense at
first glance.
It’s something that I used to do as well.
It can work fine for some people but for the
vast majority of trainees it’s just not
going to be necessary.
I mean, if you’ve reached your desired level
of leanness and you’re not aiming to lose
any more fat then it doesn’t really make
sense to only increase your calories by, say
five percent because doing that would actually
keep you in a nett calorie deficit during
that time, which means you’re going to keep
losing fat to a certain degree and you’re
also just prolonging the amount of time that
it’s going to take to get your metabolism
re-elevated and your hormones and your appetite
back in balance.
So instead of slow drawn out reverse dieting,
a better approach is to just move straight
from your deficit right back to your calorie
maintenance level as quickly as you can.
Remember that your maintenance calories are
what it takes to maintain your current weight.
And so you’re not going to magically gain
fat by doing that.
However, the key thing to understand here,
and this is the big mistake that most people
make when they transition from cutting to
bulking, is that your calorie maintenance
level at the end of your cut is not the same
as it was at the beginning of your cut.
Your overall bodyweight is obviously going
to be lower after you’ve finished cutting
and your metabolism has adapted to a certain
degree and so your maintenance level is also
going to be lower as a result of that.
You know, a lot of people will start off with
a maintenance level of, say three thousand
calories, they start their cut at twenty-five
hundred calories, they end off at two thousand
and then they immediately jump right back
to three thousand calories, or they might
even go and add in a few hundred more on top
of that because they’re trying to create
an extra surplus for muscle growth.
When it reality, their actual maintenance
level might be more like twenty-five hundred
calories rather than three thousand and their
calories from muscle growth at that point
might be more like twenty-eight hundred calories
rather than, say thirty-three hundred.
So, there’s no perfect way to know precisely
what you’re exact maintenance calories are
going to be after your cut is over.
It’s not going to be a hundred percent dead
on but a good way to estimate it, assuming
you’ve cut down to maybe twelve percent
bodyfat give or take as a male or about twenty
percent give or take as a female, and I don’t
recommend committing to a full on bulk unless
you’re somewhere around that level anyway.
So if you are much above that, you’ll probably
want to lean down first but if you have gotten
down to around that level then a basic body
weight multiplier should work fine.
I’ve typically recommended that people multiply
their bodyweight in pounds by fourteen to
sixteen and if you take into account some
of those metabolic adaptation that are going
to occur at the end of a cut, you can just
go with the lower end of fourteen to be safe.
So just take your bodyweight in pounds, multiply
it by fourteen and then treat that as your
approximate new calorie maintenance level.
Another method you can use is your rate of
weight loss instead.
So if at the end of your cut you’re losing
about a pound per week, which would be pretty
standard, that should represent about a five
hundred calorie deficit, in which case you
can just go ahead and add back in five hundred
calories to put yourself around your maintenance
level.
Again, these calculations are never going
to be perfect and being off by a bit isn’t
a big deal, but this should put you around
the right level.
So, now that you’ve gone from a calorie
deficit to around your calorie maintenance
level you are likely going to see a small
amount of immediate weight gain.
But keep in mind that as long as you’ve
only made a moderate increase to your calories
using one of those methods that I just gave,
this isn’t going to be the result of fat
gain but it’s just going to be from increases
in glycogen levels, water weight and just
from having more food in your system in general.
But give that a few days to fully kick in
and then from there just watch your overall
bodyweight and see what happens.
If it stabilizes at that point then you’ll
know that you’ve hit your current calorie
maintenance level and you can just move right
into your calorie surplus from there.
Or if you’re still losing weight then you’ll
want to increase your calories further until
your weight does stabilize.
So, maybe add in another hundred calories
or so, give it five days, add another hundred
and just continue until you hit that stabilization
point.
In terms of your actual calorie surplus, anywhere
form about two hundred to three hundred and
fifty above maintenance per day that’s going
to be a good figure for a lean bulk.
Beginners can go with a higher end, since
they’re going to have the highest muscle
building potential and more intermediate trainees
can use the lower end.
And if you’re a advance trainee then I’d
go even lower, maybe around one hundred to
one hundred and fifty per day on average since
muscle growth will be happening quite slowly
at that point.
But that’s really all there is to it, guys.
Estimate your new calorie maintenance level
once our cut has ended, find the intake that
stabilizes you weight and then move into a
calorie surplus for lean bulking.
There’s no need to turn this onto a super
long, drawn out process.
Your basic goal is to just get back maintenance
and into a surplus as quickly as you can but
to do it a controlled manner.
Also keep in mind that once your calories
go back up and your hormone levels get back
into balance your actual metabolic rate will
increase as well.
And so even though your maintenance calories
or your calorie surplus target might seem
a bit low at the very end of the cut, it will
start o gradually increased and you should
be able to steadily eat more food without
actually gaining bodyfat.
And lastly, also keep in mind that some bodyfat
gain is inevitable when you’re moving from
cutting to bulking.
It’s just part of the process.
So it isn’t going to be perfect, especially
if you had cut down to a very lean bodyfat
percentage.
But the main thing here is to just minimize
it rather than going all out like so many
people do after their diet ends.
Achieving significant fatloss is a tough process
that requires self control and discipline
and the lasting you want to do is go ahead
and throw all that effort down the drain by
just binge-ing once your cut is over because
that’s a very common thing that you will
see unfortunately.
So I hope this was helpful.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to lay out a complete
bulking or cutting phase from A to Z.
The workouts, the meal plans, supplement guides
and one-on-one coaching then you can check
out my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
the link is in the description box.
Make sure to follow me social media here,
the links for that are also in the description.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
if you did enjoy the video make sure to hit
the like button, share, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.