Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, SeanNal.com,
BodyTransformationTruth.com, quick shout out
to Chris, a subscriber I just met at the gym
who just moved here, welcome to Victoria,
this video here is actually just a bit of
a quick rant slash a piece of basic advice
for all of the beginners out there.
You would think that this advice would be
a fairly obvious point even if somebody was
a novice lifter, but I’m personally in the
gym 6 days a week and I see this over and
over and over again and so I just needed to
make a quick video to address it.
And all I wanted to point out is that if you
can’t use a full range of motion, in proper
form with a given weight, and without the
help of a spotter, then the weight is just
too heavy for you, plain and simple.
I see this all the time in the gym, someone
loading up two and a half or three plates
on the bench press and then performing quarter
reps while their spotter does half the work,
or trying to go way too heavy on squats and
only descending down about halfway, or grabbing
a pair of 45 pound dumbbells and doing lateral
raises using a ton of momentum, the list just
goes on and on.
First of all, using a heavier weight at the
expensive of proper form is not helping you
build muscle faster.
Your muscles don’t know the difference between
a 300 pound squat and a 200 pound squat, the
only thing that they experience and respond
to is how much tension they’re being placed
under, and using a weight that you can handle
in proper form for a full range of motion
and with only a small amount of natural momentum,
that’s going to help you maximize tension
on the muscle and that’s going to help you
maximize your size and strength gains.
Secondly, going too heavy with poor form is
going to place your joints and your connective
tissues under a lot more stress, your chances
for injury are going to go way up, and the
truth is that weightlifting injuries are very
common even among people who do use proper
form, and if you do get injured it's going
to throw your entire plan off track, and possibly
irreversibly depending on how bad it is.
Injury prevention should actually be treated
as a primary factor in your program even though
it’s something that alot of people don’t
think too much about, because if you get injured,
you can’t train as effectively or you can’t
train at all.
And thirdly, if you’re doing it because
you want to impress people at the gym or because
you’re trying to keep up with the people
around you, you need to understand that number
one, people in the gym are really only concerned
with what they’re doing in their own workouts
and no one actually cares how much somebody
else can lift, they’re really just focused
on themselves, and number 2, if you are someone
who for example loads up 10 plates on the
leg press and then pumps out tiny quarter
reps thinking that it looks impressive, you’re
actually having the opposite effect because
the people around you can clearly see that
you aren’t doing the exercise properly.
So, don’t be one of these out of control
ego-lifting guys in the gym, it’s not helping
you get better results, it’s increasing
your chances for injury, and it doesn’t
impress anybody either.
Select a weight that you can use in proper
form for a full range of motion, focus on
gradual progression over time, and eventually
you will be able to lift those very heavy
weights except that you’ll be doing it properly.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found these tips helpful.
For more training advice along with science-based
nutrition and supplementation advice to maximize
your progress, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking here or using
the link in the description box below.
If you enjoyed the video, make sure to hit
the LIKE button, leave a comment and subscribe.
And you can also check out my official blog
overat SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.