In this video, we aim to figure 
out if you're missing out on more  
muscle growth by NOT changing 
your exercises every session.
Accommodation is considered 
a general law of biology.
As per the science and 
practice of strength training,  
the response of a biological object to 
a constant stimulus decreases over time.
Applying this to resistance training,  
training with the exact same routine will 
incrementally produce fewer and fewer gains.
Now, regardless of how you train, the amount of 
gains you can experience diminishes over time.
The amount of gains you experience in your 
first two years of consistent training  
is going to be greater than the gains 
experienced in the subsequent two years.
For example, Kraemer et al. evaluated 
around 140 studies and established this  
relationship between training 
experience and strength gains.  
The longer you've been training, the 
less strength gains you experience.
Similar trends likely exist for building muscle.
Nevertheless, the law of accommodation still 
suggests your body becomes non-response  
quicker when training with the 
exact same routine long-term.
In an attempt to counter this accommodation,  
one extreme response is to change the 
exercises you perform every single session.
This is known as muscle confusion 
in the bodybuilding world.
It's hypothesized changing exercises every session 
exposes your muscles to consistent novel stimuli,  
thus limiting any accommodation 
that may diminish muscle growth.
Though this sounds nice in theory, 
does it play out in reality?
Does changing exercises every 
session enhance muscle hypertrophy?
A Spanish study by Baz-Valle et al. is the 
only study I'm aware of examining this.
The researchers recruited 19 men with 
at least 2 years of training experience,  
who back squatted an average of 123kg 
and bench pressed an average of 94kg.
The subjects were assigned to 
either a fixed or variation group.
Both groups performed two upper body and two 
lower-body training sessions per week for 8 weeks.
The fixed group performed the same 6 upper 
body exercises on their upper body days,  
and the same 6 lower body 
exercises on their lower body days.
The variation group used a phone 
app consisting of 80 different  
exercises to randomly generate 
what exercises they trained with.  
On the upper body days, the phone app 
generated 3 pulling and 3 pushing exercises.  
On the lower body days, the phone app generated 
3 anterior chain and 3 posterior chain exercises.
Of course, this likely meant the 
variation group was changing exercises  
every session and probably not that 
frequently performing the same exercise.
Both groups, on all their exercises, performed 
3 sets of 6 to 12 repetitions to failure.
Before and after the study, thickness of 
the rectus femoris, vastus intermedius,  
and vastus lateralis was measured at approximately 
50% of the thigh bone length via ultrasound.
it was found increases in thickness 
of all three of the muscles were not  
statistically different between 
the fixed and variation groups.
Now, some of the percentages 
seem to favor the fixed group,  
especially the rectus femoris percentage gains.
Did the small sample sizes of the 
study compromise the ability to  
detect this percentage change as statistically 
significant, something we call a type 2 error?
Or maybe it was that small sample sizes 
introduced large variation. For instance,  
the subjects in the fixed group might 
have just so happened to have better  
average rectus femoris muscle-building genetics.
In any event, this study fails to 
qualify as evidence that changing  
exercises every session 
enhances muscle hypertrophy.
The researchers found through a 
questionnaire handed to the subjects,  
the variation group saw increased motivation 
levels to train throughout the study,  
whereas the fixed group's 
motivation levels slightly declined.
As a result, if the study does truly suggest 
there's no difference between fixed and variation  
training (there were no type 2 errors), then 
this is evidence changing exercises every  
session may be a viable way to enhance motivation 
levels while not compromising muscle growth.
Despite this study's findings, 
I think it's worth touching on  
three potential considerations with 
changing exercises every session.
Firstly, many exercises (particularly 
compound exercises) are skills.
Regular practice of an exercise is required to 
achieve smoother and more efficient movement,  
something that would ensure we're stimulating 
the intended muscles most effectively.
Changing exercises every session can 
prevent or significantly delay exercise  
skill acquisition. This may be more so a problem 
for individuals with minimal training experience.
Secondly, changing exercises every 
session might require longer recovery  
durations than training with fixed 
exercises, at least in the long term.
Allow me to explain.
The amount of muscle damage present is one factor  
that determines whether you're 
recovered between sessions.
When you first expose yourself to a novel training 
routine, the amount of muscle damage produced  
afterward is quite high. But as you continue to 
expose your body to the same training routine  
week after week, the amount of muscle damage 
produced afterward incrementally decreases.
This is thanks to a range of adaptations within 
the muscles called the repeated bout effect.
The repeated bout effect is going 
to be greater when performing the  
same weekly exercises in your training routine.
Most people have experienced this. When 
performing the same weekly training routine,  
the amount of soreness you experience gradually 
diminishes over many weeks of training,  
and you're overall recovery 
capacities become better.
However, If you're changing the 
exercises you perform every session,  
the repeated bout effect likely occurs to a lower 
extent. It's likely your recovery durations are  
going to always be longer compared to 
training with the same weekly routine.
Now, in the Baz-Valle et al. study, evidently 
recovery was not a problem for the variation  
group, as the variation and fixed group's gains 
were not statistically different from one another.
But it's worth noting the study 
used an upper/lower split,  
in which the same muscle 
was trained 72 hours apart.
However, what if something like 
a full-body split was used,  
in which the same muscle is mostly 
trained 48 hours or quicker apart?  
Would the variation group appropriately 
be able to recover long-term?
It's difficult to say without future research.
Another point worth adding is there's evidence 
gradually increasing the number of weekly sets  
you perform for a muscle group might be 
an effective way to get past plateaus.  
We overviewed this evidence in 
our ultimate guide to sets video.
Of course, increasing set numbers requires you can 
tolerate and recover from this increased volume.  
This might be harder to do when 
changing exercises every session.
The third consideration with changing exercises 
every session relates to tracking progression.
When performing the same weekly exercises, 
so long as you're able to progressively  
overload them in some form (either via 
increasing load or repetition numbers),  
you have proof you're progressing.
Furthermore, if you're not progressing with your 
fixed exercise selection in the way you expect,  
this can be an indicator something's wrong,  
and it allows you to re-assess your 
training plan and make adjustments.
In other words, fixed exercise selection 
can help you individualize and optimize  
your training routine in the long 
term via more meticulous tracking.
When changing exercises every session, 
you can simply perform repetitions to  
or very close to failure on them, which 
ensures you've provoked a good stimulus.  
However, the fact is it's very difficult to 
tell if you're making progress week to week.  
If you hit a plateau, it's going 
to be difficult to establish this.
We currently have one study by 
Baz-Valle et al. finding changing  
exercises every session was comparable for 
muscle growth to training with fixed exercises.
Despite this, I think there are some potential 
issues with changing exercises every session.
Firstly, for those with minimal training 
experience, changing exercises every session  
can prevent or at least significantly delay the 
development of form and skill with exercises.
Secondly, over the long-term, changing exercises 
every sesion probably requires longer recovery  
durations than training with the same exercises, 
this might make it unpractical when training  
with full-body splits that require you 
to recover within 48 hours or less.  
Moreover, it may also make it challenging 
to increase volume in the long term,  
and increasing volume may be 
helpful for getting past plateaus.
Finally, changing exercises every 
session makes it difficult to track  
progression and very challenging to 
establish if you've hit a plateau.