Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com and in today's
video I want to discuss behind the neck pulldowns
and how they compare to standard pulldowns
to the front of your body.
So there is no question that lat pulldowns
are an excellent movement for stimulating
the lats and for building up overall back
width thickness and every well rounded back
training routine should include a basic vertical
pulling movement of some kind whether it be
some variation of the lat pulldown or the
chin up.
These two exercises utilize the same basic
movement patterns so either one is going to
be a perfectly fine choice.
So in the same way that I recommend that you
always perform your overhead pressing movements
either in front or out to the side of your
neck in order to protect yourself from injury,
the same advice is going to apply here as
well.
When it comes to performing lat pulldowns,
always pull the bar down in front of your
neck and to your upper chest, and there are
a few main reasons for this.
First of all, performing lat pulldowns with
your arms behind your head puts your shoulders
into an excessive position of external rotation,
and this places your rotator cuff muscles
(particularly the subscapularis) into an overly
stressed position, preventing them from properly
supporting your shoulder joint and increasing
your risk for shoulder injury.
The second reason is that since most people
don't have the proper flexibility to pull
the bar down in a straight line, they end
up excessively protruding their head forward
which places a dangerous amount of stress
on the cervical spine.
And the final reason is that behind the neck
pulldowns promote bad motor patterning by
encouraging forward head posture which can
easily lead to mid and lower back problems
among other issues.
Now I'm definitely not saying that behind
the neck pulldowns are guaranteed to cause
you injury or that every single person who
performs them is going to run into problems.
If you do have really good shoulder flexibility
and you use moderate weights and you perform
the lift under strict control then there is
a decent chance that it's not going to cause
any noticeable issues for you.
However, given that performing lat pulldowns
to the front is a natural movement pattern
for the human body and that it's going to
fully stimulate your lats without placing
your neck, shoulders and spine into a vulnerable
position, I don't really see any good reason
to take the risk.
Behind the neck pulldowns offer no additional
muscle building advantage that lat pulldowns
to the front don't, and yet they do present
the very real risk of injury.
Every single exercise that you perform in
the gym has a ratio of risk-reward attached
to it and if your goal is to maximize your
muscle gains and to ensure that you remain
injury-free over the long haul then you need
to choose your lifts and your training methods
based on what tips that ratio most in your
favour.
So my recommendation is to perform your lat
pulldowns with an overhand grip, hands spaced
1 to 2 inches outside of shoulder width, torso
angled slightly back and pulling the bar in
front of your neck to your upper chest.
This variation is going to allow you to train
your lats with full effectiveness while keeping
your shoulders, neck and your spine protected
at the same time, and I'll link a video here
in which I demonstrate proper lat pulldown
form if you want to see a live demonstration
of that.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did enjoy the video please make sure
to hit the "like" button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up-to-date on future
videos, and make sure to check out my complete
step-by-step muscle building and fat loss
programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the Description box below.
Talk to you soon.