What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and this video
here is just a quick follow up to the video
that I did a couple weeks ago where I talked
about dirty bulking and where I talked about
why it’s pretty much always a bad idea assuming
that you’re goal is to build a lean and
muscular body and why lean bulking with a
smaller calorie surplus will actually help
you make better progress in the long term.
And that’s because your body can only divert
a limited number of calories toward muscle
growth in any given day and any excess beyond
that is just going to be stored as fat.
And the more fat you gain the longer you’re
going to need to spend dieting later on to
get rid of it and the worst you look and feel
during your actual muscle building phase.
There were several comments on that video
basically agreeing and saying that dirty bulking
isn’t a good idea for most people but saying
that it’s something that hardgainers can
do since they generally have a tougher time
gaining muscle.
And the truth is that within the lifting population
hardgainers or ectomorphs which will just
define as those who have a naturally thin
bone structure with below average muscle building
genetics who don’t gain weight easily, they
generally are going to be the most likely
to follow that dirty bulking approach because
they have it their head that since they have
a fast metabolism and because they don’t
gain muscle easily that they need a bigger
calorie surplus in comparison to others in
order to pack on size.
Now, someone who is naturally skinny and who
doesn’t gain weight easily they might have
a higher resting metabolic rate than the average
person, in which case they would have a higher
calorie maintenance level and would need more
total daily calories in order to build muscle
consistently.
However, the actual size of your calorie surplus
as a hardgainer, meaning how many calories
you eat beyond your maintenance level and
your actual rate of weight gain from week
to week, that shouldn’t be any different
and it shouldn’t be increased just because
you have a harder time getting muscle in general.
Again, a bigger calorie surplus beyond what
your body can actually use does not equal
more muscle growth.
And a hardgainer isn’t magically going to
be able to divert more calories to muscle
growth just because they’re starting out
on the skinnier sign.
In fact, if anything someone who has below
average muscle building genetics would actually
want to be even more cautious with this because
their body is likely going to divert fewer
calories toward muscle growth than someone
with average or above average genetics will.
So just because you’re a hardgainer and
maybe you’re able to eat higher amounts
of food without gaining weight that still
doesn’t mean that aimlessly stuffing your
face all day with high calorie foods and weight
gainer shakes and eating to the point where
you’re completely stuffed and feeling sick,
it doesn’t mean that that’s going to be
a good idea.
Again, you might need more total food on paper
in order to gain weight, and so maybe you
might end up incorporating a higher amount
of less clean calories into the mix to help
you get there but it still has to be kept
within limits.
You still need to figure out what your daily
calorie maintenance level is, which is how
many calories you need to eat each day to
maintain your current weight, and then just
create a small calorie surplus beyond that
to support muscle growth.
And then from there just focus on slow, gradual
weight gain so that the maximum amount comes
in the form of actual lean muscle and the
minimum amount comes as bodyfat.
I’ve just seen it way too many times where
a naturally thin guy wants t bulk up as quickly
as possible, he just feel skinny and just
desperately wants to get bigger so he goes
way overboard on calories and eats everything
in sight, maybe packs on like twenty pounds
in three months, basically ends up just looking
like a fatter version of his previous physique
then spend another two to three months cutting
and then realize that he only gain a couple
pounds of actual muscle form all of that hard
work, and then he doesn’t really look that
much different at all five or six months later.
When instead he could’ve just maintain a
smaller and more controlled calorie surplus,
took things slowly and spend that entire five
or six months making consistent quality lean
gains without the need to go off track doing
a full cutting phase and without letting his
body go, basically, to crap along the way.
There’s no way around the fact that muscle
growth requires time and patience, and if
you’re a hardgainer it’s going to be an
even slower process.
You absolutely can still make significance
gains overtime and build a great physique
but you have to be patient with it and you
have to be willing to commit to this for the
long term.
It’s not going to happen in a few weeks
or even a few months.
If you really want to make a serious transformation
depending on how much you’re wanting to
gain and your bone structure, you’re probably
looking at around a year or two years in order
to really add some noteworthy size to your
frame.
That’s just the way it is.
So whether you have average genetics or below
average there’s no way to rush the process,
find out how many calories you require to
maintain your current weight.
If you identify as a hardgainer or as an ectomorph
and you’re probably still a beginner at
this, and in that case about three hundred
calories or so on top of your maintenance
level would be a good starting point.
And aiming for about half a pound of total
weight gain per week but also recognizing
that the longer you’ve been training, the
slower your rate of weight gain is going to
come.
But the bottom line is that force feeding
yourself using a dirty bulking approach is
just, in my view, pretty much never going
to be the best way to go about it for the
average trainee and that applies to hardgainers
as well.
Lean bulking will probably allow you to gain
more muscle in the long term, since you won’t
have to divert nearly as much time and effort
to cutting, not to mention that cutting is
pretty tedious process in the first place.
And you’ll just look and feel better throughout
your entire muscle building phase both physically
and mentally.
So, thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this was helpful.
If you want to get a complete step-by-step
plan to help you maximize your genetic muscle
building potential in the most efficient way
possible while staying lean, including a fully
structured workout plans, meal plans, supplement
guides and one-on-one coaching make sure to
head over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete Body Transformation Blueprint
System.
You can do that by clicking here at the top
of the screen or by using the link in the
description box.
If you enjoyed the video, as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.