In a recent video, we detailed how there's
good evidence leaving 3 to 0 repetitions in
reserve produces similar muscle hypertrophy
to training to failure.
Leaving 0 repetitions in reserve indicates
you could not have done another full repetition
while leaving 3 repetitions in reserve indicates
you could have performed another 3 full repetitions.
Also, we're defining failure as technical
failure, the point at which you fail at performing
another full repetition with correct execution.
This was essentially the definition used in
the studies we examined, and for muscle hypertrophy,
it makes little to deviate from using the
correct execution, as doing so would typically
not benefit the tension experienced by the
muscles you're trying to train.
For instance, in a biceps curl, deviating
from correct execution via excessively swinging
your back will recruit the spinal erector
muscles.
But this won't enhance elbow flexor recruitment.
It might decrease elbow flexor recruitment
in certain circumstances.
With those clarifications out the way, as
noted, leaving 3 to 0 repetitions in reserve
likely produces similar hypertrophy to training
to failure.
But what about leaving more than 3 repetitions
in reserve?
Could leaving 4, 5, 6, or even more repetitions
in reserve still optimize muscle hypertrophy?
By my count, 4 regular longitudinal studies
have technically examined how leaving more
than 3 repetitions in reserve compares to
training to failure for hypertrophy.
Let's analyze them.
Martorelli et al. allocated 89 previously
untrained women into one of three groups:
a failure, non-failure equal set, or non-failure
+1 set group.
All three groups trained the barbell biceps
curl twice per week for 10 weeks.
The failure group performed the exercise with
3 sets of repetitions to failure with a 70%
one-rep max load each session.
The non-failure equal set group performed
3 sets of 7 repetitions with a 70% one-rep
max load each session.
With a 70% one-rep max load on the barbell
biceps curl, the data provided in the study
suggests subjects could perform a maximum
of 12-13 repetitions.
Meaning this non-failure equal set group would
have been leaving rouglhy 5 to 6 repetitions
in reserve on their first set.
However, their 2nd and 3rd sets, due to cumulative
fatigue, would have probably had them leave
roughly 4-2 repetitions in reserve.
The non-failure +1 set group performed 4 sets
of 7 repetitions with a 70% one-rep max load
each session.
This group would have also been training with
roughly between 6 to 2 repetitions in reserve,
the only difference being they performed an
extra set per session.
All groups rested 2 minutes between their
sets in a session.
Moreover, one-rep max was retested on the
5th week to readjust the 70% one-rep max training
loads used for all groups.
By the end of the study, increases in elbow
flexor thickness seemed to be greatest for
the failure group.
Therefore, this study suggests regardless
of whether an individual performs the same
number of sets, or performs one extra set,
leaving more than 3 repetitions in reserve
for the majority of your sets may be inferior
for hypertrophy.
Do the other studies support this conclusion?
Let's find out.
The second study by Lasevicius et al. assigned
25 previously untrained men into either a
high load or low load group.
All subjects performed the unilateral leg
extension twice per week for 8 weeks.
The high load group used an 80% one-rep max
load.
With one leg, which we'll call the high load
failure leg, they performed 3 sets of repetitions
to failure every session.
Ultimately, this leg performed 12 repetitions
on average in each set.
With their other leg, which we'll call the
high load non-failure leg, they performed
60% of the average repetitions achieved each
set with the high load failure leg.
Moreover, they performed additional sets to
equalize the overall volume load (the product
of sets x reps x load) to the high load failure
leg.
Ultimately, this leg performed an average
of 5-6 sets of 7 repetitions, meaning they
would have been leaving an average of 5 repetitions
in reserve while performing 2-3 extra sets
versus the high load failure leg.
The low load group used a 30% one-rep max
load.
With one leg, which we'll call the low load
failure leg, they performed 3 sets of repetitions
to failure every session.
Ultimately, this leg performed 34 repetitions
on average in each set.
With their other leg, which we'll call the
low load non-failure leg, they performed 60%
of the average repetitions achieved each set
with the low load failure leg, and they performed
additional sets to equalize the overall volume
load to the low load failure leg.
Ultimately, this leg performed an average
of 5-6 sets of 20 repetitions, meaning they
would have been leaving an average of 14 repetitions
in reserve while performing 2-3 extra sets
versus the low load failure leg.
All subjects rested 2 minutes between their
sets in a session.
Moreover, one-rep max was retested during
the 4th week to readjust the 30% and 80% one-rep
max training loads used for the respective
groups.
By the end of the study, except for the low
load non-failure leg, all the other legs experienced
similar increases in quadriceps cross-sectional
area.
As a result, given the low load-non failure
leg experienced the least growth, this suggests
leaving an average of 14 repetitions in reserve
may be unable to optimize muscle hypertrophy,
despite them performing 2-3 extra sets compared
to the failure legs.
However, given the high load non-failure leg
experienced similar growth to the high load
and low load failure legs, this suggests leaving
an average of 5 repetitions in reserve might
actually be fine for muscle hypertrophy, so
long as 2-3 extra sets are performed.
Stated another way, performing 5-6 sets while
leaving roughly 5 repetitions in reserve may
be as effective as performing 3 sets of repetitions
to failure.
This is interesting, perhaps on a set equated
basis, performing 3 sets of repetitions to
failure would be superior to performing 3
sets of leaving 5 repetitions in reserve (as
somewhat supported by the Martorelli study).
However, performing extra sets while leaving
5 repetitions in reserve compensates for this.
Having said this, the third study by Karsten
et al. questions this.
18 men with 2-5 years of training experience
were assigned into a failure or non-failure
group.
Both groups trained a range of exercises twice
per week for 6 weeks.
The failure group aimed to perform every exercise
each session with 4 sets of 10 repetitions
to failure while using 2 minutes of rest between
sets.
When needed, the load was increased if they
could do more than 10 repetitions on a set,
or if they could not complete the 10 repetitions,
30 seconds of rest was given to enable them
to complete this number.
The non-failure group aimed to perform every
exercise each session with 8 sets of 5 repetitions
that left roughly 5 repetitions in reserve,
with 1 minute of rest between sets.
When needed, this group adjusted the load
each set to maintain roughly 5 repetitions
in reserve.
By the end of the study, increases in thickness
of the vastus medialis and elbow flexors tended
to be greater for the failure group, whereas
anterior deltoid thickness increases were
similar between both groups.
As a result, this study conflicts with the
Lasevicuis study, as it largely suggests despite
performing extra sets (4 in this case), leaving
roughly 5 repetitions in reserve was unable
to optimize muscle hypertrophy.
Why the conflicting findings between these
two studies?
For one, the Laseviciuis study used previously
untrained men, while the Karsten study used
men with 2-5 years of training experience.
Maybe this implies leaving 5 repetitions in
reserve, and performing extra sets, only works
in untrained individuals and not those with
greater training experience.
Secondly, as we noted, if the failure group
in the Karsten study could not complete 10
repetitions on a set, they were given a 30-second
break to enable them to then achieve this
number.
This is somewhat like rest-pause training.
Frustratingly, the researchers did not state
how frequently subjects did this, but if it
was frequent, perhaps this could somehow explain
the conflicting results between the two studies,
as the Lasevicuis study merely had the failure
groups perform their repetitions to failure
(nothing more, nothing less).
Thirdly, in the Lasevicuis study, all subjects
rested 2 minutes between their sets in a session.
Opposingly, the Karsten study had the failure
group rest 2 minutes between sets and the
non-failure group rest only 1 minute between
sets.
This potentially confounds the Karsten study,
as it's likely resting for 2 minutes between
sets is better than resting for 1 minute between
sets for hypertrophy, at least with compound
exercises.
Therefore, the largely inferior results for
the non-failure group might not necessarily
be because they left 5 repetitions in reserve,
rather because they only rested 1 minute between
sets.
Unfortunately, it's difficult to say which
of these three explanations, was it down to
the differences in training experience, the
potential rest-pause style in the Karsten
study, or rest intervals that explains the
conflicting findings of the Lasevicius and
Karsten studies, more research is undoubtedly
required.
*PAUSE*
The last regular longitudinal study I'm aware
of that has examined how leaving more than
3 repetitions in reserve compares to training
to failure comes from Carroll et al.
15 men with an average of 7.7 years of training
experience were allocated into a relative
intensity or rep max group.
Both groups trained three times per week for
10 weeks.
Quite an intricate periodized training plan
was used for both groups.
The link to the full study can be found in
the description for those after more details,
but I'll simplify the main points.
Both groups performed the same exercises (mainly
compound exercises, with some isolation work)
for the same number of sets and roughly the
same number of repetitions.
The rep max group used rep max loads for their
sets.
For example, they may have performed an exercise
for 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions with a 10 repetition
maximum load.
The researchers stated this group reached
failure on the last set of each exercise.
Moreover, I think it's probably likely their
other sets would have left 3 or fewer repetitions
in reserve, which we know is fine for muscle
hypertrophy.
The relative intensity group used around 70-90%
of the rep max loads for an exercise.
For instance, if someone in the relative intensity
group could perform 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions
with a 100kg load on an exercise, and this
100kg load was their 10 rep-max load, using
an 85% relative intensity resulted in them
performing 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions with
an 85kg load.
Based on some calculations, this relative
intensity group would have been leaving around
2 to 6 repetitions in reserve on two of the
training days per week, and between 4-14 repetitions
in reserve on the 3rd day of each week.
By the end of the study, increases in vastus
lateralis anatomical cross-sectional area
favored the relative intensity group.
In other words, with all other training variables
equal, largely leaving more than 3 repetitions
in reserve (which is what the relative intensity
group did) was more favorable for growth compared
to training to or closer to failure (which
is what the rep max group did).
Having said this, there is a potential confounding
factor in this study.
Both groups performed additional sprint training
twice per week.
Training to failure is more fatiguing than
leaving repetitions in reserve, and thus added
sprint training may have impaired the rep
max group's recovery capacity, thereby possibly
explaining why they experienced suboptimal
growth versus the relative intensity group.
If true, perhaps this study indicates if an
individual performs additional high-intensity
training (like sprint training) or frequent
cardiovascular training sessions of any type,
leaving more than 3 repetitions in reserve
might be better for managing fatigue and thus
promoting muscle growth.
Although, I still feel more research is needed
to verify this.
I think it'd be useful to see simpler and
cleaner designed studies comparing muscle
growth between training with various proximities
to failure (such as 3 repetitions in reserve,
5 repetitions in reserve, or failure training)
while all subjects perform additional cardio
or high-intensity training.
In summary, Martorelli et al. indicate with
all other training variables equal, largely
leaving more than 3 repetitions in reserve
does not optimally build muscle in previously
untrained women.
Lasevicius et al. indicate that provided an
individual performs 2-3 more sets for an exercise
than usual, leaving an average of 5 repetitions
in reserve can build muscle optimally in previously
untrained men.
However, a study by Karsten et al. suggests
in men with 2-5 years of training experience,
despite performing 4 extra sets, leaving 5
repetitions in reserve largely failed to optimize
muscle growth.
Although there were some confounders in this
study.
Finally, Carroll et al. indicate when an individual
performs additional sprint training sessions,
training with more than 3 repetitions in reserve
may be superior for promoting muscle growth
compared to training to or closer to failure
with all other training variables equal.
Overall, it's clear to see this current evidence
is limited, somewhat conflicting, and overall
far from clear.
As a result, we unfortunately cannot conclude
if leaving more than 3 repetitions in reserve
can optimize muscle hypertrophy.
Now, for those who have seen our previous
video in which we detailed how the current
research indicates leaving 3 to 0 repetitions
in reserve is similarly effective to training
to failure for muscle hypertrophy, you may
recall at the end of this video, I stated
there's some velocity based research that
indicates leaving more than 3 repetitions
in reserve may be able to optimize muscle
growth.
However, after recently digging a lot more
into this research and even planning a whole
6,000-word video on it, I eventually realized
that this research has far too many considerations
and practical limitations.
More specifically, due to the design of the
studies, a lot of math and extrapolation was
required to figure out the repetition in reserve
numbers, which ultimately made it very inaccurate,
such that it's just not entirely clear what
repetition in reserve numbers was used in
those studies.
As I result, I came to the conclusion it was
not worth detailing this research.
On the basis of this, as well as the research
detailed in this video, because it's simply
unclear if leaving more than 3 repetitions
in reserve can still optimize muscle hypertrophy,
I think it's probably best to err on the side
of caution and aim to leave 3 or fewer repetitions
in reserve if your aim is to build muscle
as best as you can.