Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to answer the question of what
happens when you stop taking creatine.
So will you lose all of the positive benefits
that you achieved during creatine supplementation
and are there any possible side effects associated
with suddenly discontinuing creatine use.
So let’s go over it.
The first thing to keep in mind here is that
everybody responds to creatine supplementation
differently.
Some lifters see significant gains from it,
while others, as high as up to 30% of the
population are known as “creatine non-responders”
and they don’t see any noticeable results
whatsoever.
The effects that you personally experience
once you discontinue creatine supplementation
are largely going to depend on how well you
responded to it in the first place.
So the more significantly you responded, the
more noticeable the change will be once you
stop, and vice versa.
Creatine benefits your muscle building program
in two major ways.
The first is by increasing intra-cellular
water retention, and the second is by increasing
your strength and power in the gym.
So let’s take a look at these two factors.
The first are the changes In intra-cellular
water retention.
So creatine requires additional water in order
to be stored in your muscle tissue.
And after your muscles have become completely
saturated with creatine, and this usually
happens around about 3 weeks after supplementing
with 5 grams daily, your muscles should take
on a slightly fuller appearance as a result
of the increased fluid.
So once you discontinue creatine supplementation
and those extra creatine stores have left
your body after a few weeks, this additional
water retention will no longer be necessary
and will be cleared out as well.
For some lifters, this might mean a fairly
quick drop of several pounds of water weight
once the creatine levels leave their system,
and for others the effects may hardly even
be noticeable.
Again, this really depends on how well you
responded at the very start.
One thing is for sure though, and that is
that whatever additional water weight you
gained from your creatine supplementation
when you began will mostly be lost once you
discontinue.
And the second issue are the changes in strength
and power.
Now this is much harder to accurately pinpoint,
and again, it's going to vary quite a bit
from person to person.
By increasing the efficiency of your body’s
use of ATP (which is the usable energy molecule
within your muscles), creatine improves your
gym performance and increases your overall
strength and power output.
Now when you stop using creatine, the additional
phosphate groups it was previously providing
to your muscle cells for enhanced strength
will also be diminished.
So, assuming that you are someone who does
respond well to creatine supplementation,
you may notice a small reduction in your overall
strength after a few weeks of stopping.
However, it likely won’t be to a very significant
degree as long as you continue with your regular
training program.
As far as your actual lean muscle gains are
concerned, it’s highly unlikely that you’re
going to notice any decrease there, again,
assuming that you continue with your training
and eating plan in the same way that you were
previously.
Now are there any side effects to suddenly
stopping creatine use?
Well creatine is the most widely researched
sports supplement in the world and it's never
been shown to be harmful in any way when used
within the recommended daily dosage of about
5 grams.
And this includes periods of cycling on and
off.
Your body does adjust its own natural production
of creatine in response to external supplementation,
but this system is extremely sensitive and
it adapts virtually instantly, so once you
stop taking creatine, your natural production
will fall back into the proper range.
The real question here though is why stop
at all?
Sure, if you don’t see any real results
from using creatine in the first place, then
obviously there’s no need for you to continue.
Or perhaps you’re just tired of having to
worry about taking it every day, maybe you
really dislike the taste or the texture, though
in that case you could just use creatine pills,
or maybe you’re travelling and you don’t
want to take it with you everywhere you go,
in those cases, the choice is yours, but assuming
you’ve been using creatine consistently
and you have seen positive benefits, I can't
see any real good reason to stop.
First off, as I covered in detail in a previous
video, which I'll link here as well as the
description box below, there's really no benefit
at all to cycling on and off of creatine.
For optimal creatine results you should simply
continue with a 5 gram per day dosage on an
ongoing basis.
Secondly, there is no evidence to suggest
that continual creatine supplementation over
the long term is dangerous to your health
in any way.
And thirdly, creatine is very inexpensive,
and if you purchase it in bulk it's really
only going to cost you somewhere around 2
cents per gram which on a monthly basis works
out to about 3 dollars.
And if cost really is an issue, keep in mind
that most people can probably get away with
as little as 3 grams of creatine daily, in
which case it drops to about 2 bucks a month.
So to wrap this all up if you’ve been supplementing
with creatine to the point of full saturation,
and then you decide to discontinue, this is
what's going to happen after a few weeks.
Number 1, you will lose the additional water
retention that your body was using to store
the creatine.
Number 2, you may notice a slight reduction
in your overall strength levels, but likely
not to a significant degree.
Number 3, you will likely retain all of your
gains in actual lean muscle mass.
And number 4, you're not going to experience
any unfavorable side effects.
Once again though, this all depends on the
individual and on how well they responded
to the creatine in the first place.
If you’re considering stopping creatine
use but you're not quite sure, your best bet
is to simply discontinue for 2-3 weeks and
then see what happens.
If you do experience a drop in your overall
muscle fullness and your strength that you
aren’t happy with, then you can always go
right back on.
Or, if you don’t notice any real changes
at all then of course you can just stop altogether.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.