What's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, realscienceathletics.com and
in this video I want to talk about the number
one mistake most lifters make when it comes
to performing isolation exercises, whether
it's a bicep curl, tricep extension lateral
raise crunch, leg curl or whatever else.
Obviously the basic compound movements should
be making up the cornerstone of your workouts.
Those are going to have the biggest overall
impact on your gains by far, but including
some isolation work after your compound lifts
are complete is an effective way to round
out your overall physique and get in some
extra work for those smaller muscles that
won't be fully stimulated just through compound
movements alone.
Before I get started, if you find this video
helpful and you want to get even more daily
tips and updates from me, then make sure to
follow me over on Instagram as well @sean_nalewanyj
and as a thank you for watching this video,
I'm also doing a giveaway down below in the
comments section where you can win a free
product from my fitness supplement line, Real
Science Athletics.
So just click down below in the comment section
to enter in for that.
So we know without a doubt that progressive
overload is the central underlying principle
when it comes to building muscle consistently.
You need to be getting stronger over time
on your lifts in order to gain muscle.
And most people in the gym with basic knowledge
of training, or at least somewhat aware of
this, and they do focus on adding weight and
reps to their compound lifts over time, whether
it's the bench press or squat or overhead
press or whatever else.
But for some reason when it comes to those
smaller isolation exercises, a lot of people
end up treating them differently as if somehow
progressive overload doesn't really apply.
And instead they treat those exercises more
like pump work and just crank out a bunch
of reps without really taking stock of how
much weight they're lifting or how many reps
they're performing.
And I even see this being said on some fitness
channels where they'll say that, isolation
exercises don't allow for progressive overload
in the same way that compound movements do.
And so you should just focus more so on the
pump and the mind muscle connection with those
smaller exercises.
However, the bottom line is that if progressive
overload is the primary driver of hypertrophy,
which it is, then this applies no matter which
exercise you're doing or what muscle you're
training, that basic fundamental law doesn't
magically disappear and you still have to
consistently improve on your training performance
and subject that muscle to higher and higher
levels of tension over time if you want to
stimulate new gains.
And it's not that isolation exercise as somehow
don't allow for progressive overload, it's
just that because you're doing a single jointed
movement that mainly targets one smaller muscle,
you obviously can't move as much total weight
and so the increments that you've progressed
by are just going to be smaller.
That's really the only difference here.
For example, if you're performing a lateral
raise, let's say with 20 pound dumbbells and
then you increase the 22.5 pound dumbbells,
you're increasing the total weight lifted
by five pounds, which is actually a 25% increase.
Whereas if you were performing, let's say
a bench press with 200 pounds and then you
added five pounds, the increase there only
be 2.5%, which is 10 times less.
So the lateral raise mainly just involves
the side delts and so that entire weight increase
is being placed directly on that one muscle.
Whereas with the bench press, it's being distributed
across your chest, shoulders and triceps,
which are all working together as synergistically
at the same time to move that weight.
So with isolation movements, you still need
to focus on progressive overload, but you
just have to lower your expectations in terms
of how quickly those lifts are going to increase
and realize that even very small progressions
are still significant.
And also remember that when you do increase
the weight on an isolation exercise, because
the percentage increase is going to be larger,
like I just mentioned, you're going to feel
that increase a lot more heavily.
Ideally for something like a lateral raise,
you'd be able to go from 20 pound dumbbells
up to 21 pound dumbbells, but unless you're
using micro plates in your training, which
I'll talk about in a second, your only option
is going to be to go up to 22.5 or even maybe
25 depending on your gym.
So let me just give a few tips here when it
comes to achieving progressive overload on
those smaller isolation exercises.
So first off, if you increase the weight on
an isolation lift and it feels too heavy for
you to where you're having to cheat the weight
up just to reach the bottom end of your rep
range, then what you want to do is go back
to your previous weight and focus on training
for more reps first.
So if you were doing let's say a tricep push
down for eight reps and now you try to bump
the weight up, but you find that it feels
too heavy, try taking that previous weight
up to say 10 reps or even 12 reps before trying
to increase the weight.
Another thing you can do is to adjust the
actual execution of the lift to make a given
weight more challenging.
So one way of doing that is to just add in
a brief pause in the fully contracted position.
So maybe on a leg curl you come all the way
up and then you hold the weight at the top
for a one to two second count.
That's another method you can use to get stronger
with a given weight before you increase to
the next weight increment.
You can also slow down the negative a bit.
You can use rest pause, which means performing
your prescribed number of reps, resting 10
to 15 breaths and performing a few more reps
and then repeating that once or twice.
Or you can also just bump up the volume a
bit and perform an extra set or two for that
given exercise.
So remember that progressive overload doesn't
just have to involve adding more weight to
the bar.
It just means improving your performance on
a given exercise in some way.
Increasing the weight should be your ultimate
goal when you're still a novice lifter, but
if you are stuck on a given weight, then you
can incorporate those other methods I just
mentioned to help you break through to the
next weight increase.
And then the other point that I'd add in here
is the concept of micro loading, which is
defined ways to decrease the total amount
of weight you're adding each time so that
the percentage increase isn't as big.
So let's say you're doing a machine isolation
exercise, but the weight stack only goes up
by 10 or 15 pounds at a time, depending on
the machine, you can try resting a small dumbbell
on top of the weight stack or you can also
try hanging a 2.5 or five pound plate off
the weight pin like you see here.
This is a method that I personally use all
the time.
And if you're really serious about this, then
another thing you can do is to actually buy
magnetic micro plates online that attached
to the end of the dumbbells or the bar you're
using.
It's perfectly reasonable to go from a say
80s to 85s on a compound exercise like a dumbbell
press.
But sometimes adding five pounds aside to
an isolation exercise like a bicep curl, sometimes
that can be too much and so using micro plates
can be helpful so that you can increase the
weight more gradually.
But the bottom line here, guys is that as
I've said so many times before, progressive
overload is the primary driver of muscle growth
and there's no reason at all why this doesn't
also apply to isolation exercises.
The only difference is that the progression
is going to come more slowly because you're
only training a single muscle group using
a single jointed movement, but that doesn't
change the fact that you still need to be
improving on your performance over time in
some capacity.
Increasing the weight lifted and the number
of reps executed that should be your main
focus for as long as you can comfortably do
that.
And then if you do get to a point where adding
more weight isn't practical anymore because
of increased joint stress, let's say, for
example, you can't just add more weight to
a dumbbell lateral race forever because eventually
it is going to put a lot of stress on your
shoulders.
At that point you can focus on other methods
of progressive overload like training for
higher reps using static holds, slower negatives,
more total sets, rest pause, things like that.
But in the same way that you should be tracking
your progress and writing down your lifts
every week for all of the compound movements
that you perform, you should be treating isolation
movements in exactly the same way and striving
for improved performance over time.
Otherwise you're missing the whole point of
performing that exercise in the first place.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to grab a complete step by step plan that
shows you exactly how to lay out your compound
and isolation lists throughout the week for
the very best gains, the optimal training
split, exercise selection, volume, frequency,
rep ranges, and more, make sure to take my
physique quiz over at quiz.seannal.com because
that'll hook you up with everything you need
to know based on your individual goals, body
type, and experience level, and take you from
where you are now, all the way up to your
goal physique as efficiently as possible.
You can click up here for that or use the
link in the description box below.
And as always, make sure to hit the like button,
leave a comment and subscribe if you haven't
already in order to stay up to date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next video.