What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and in this
video today I wanted to do something a little
bit different and share with you guys some
of the, sort of, obsessive, borderline weird
shit that I did back in the day when I was
still in my early years of lifting as a teenager
and when the bodybuilding was just my absolute
passion or when it’s where most of my energy
went.
Keep in mind that I was a lot younger here
and I had a lot less bodybuilding knowledge.
I don’t consider myself to be a bodybuilder
anymore and haven’t for quite a few years
because I don’t train to be huge, it’s
not my preferred look, but back then it was
my goal to just be as muscular as humanly
possible.
Here’s the fuzzy old webcam photo of me
where I was about twenty five pounds heavier
than I am now.
A lot bigger but also carrying way more bodyfat,
keep in mind.
I just had that kind of hardcore bodybuilding
sacrifice-to-win mentality coupled with the
fact that I just have a pretty obsessive-compulsive
personality type in general when I seriously
want to achieve something.
So I thought it‘d be funny to pull up the
camera here and just share a few things form
the past.
Now, some of them aren’t crazy but a few
of them, kind of, are and I thought you guys
might get a kick out of it.
I’m sure there are more than just the ones
I’m going to be sharing here but these are
just the ones that I can remember right now.
And if you can relate to any of this or if
you have any of your own then go ahead and
post them in the comments below.
So, the first thing was setting my alarm clock
to wake up and eat tuna straight out of the
can in the middle of the night.
This was when I was still in the mindset that
the more protein I ate the more muscle I’d
build and tuna was just considered as some
sort of bodybuilding staple for whatever reason.
So I figured I’m pretty much already eating
as much as I can during my waking hours so
why not taking advantage of the other hours
I’m spending sleeping to boost my progress
even further.
So I’d set my alarm for four o’clock in
the morning and get up and eat a can of tuna
with a glass of milk and then go back to sleep.
But eventually it really started to mess with
sleep and I was tired all the time and falling
asleep in class so I didn’t keep that up
for too long.
The second thing was working out in the snow
in my backyard.
So I actually trained from home during my
first two years of bodybuilding but I was
young, I didn’t have a lot of space available
so squatting was always a really big challenge
because I didn’t have a squat rack in my
weight room downstairs.
But I discovered that outside in my backyard
I could balanced a barbell by putting one
end on top of this big rock that was there
and then balancing the other side of the bar
on the fence that was beside it.
The bar wasn’t even horizontal because the
weights, the heights for both of these things
were different so it was kind of just bent
and crooked and just hanging there but it
was at least good enough to where I could
balance it there and unrack it and do my squats.
So in the middle of winter I took all of my
weights, I put them in a wheelbarrow and then
I wheeled them over to this new squat rack
of mine.
And I do my squats on the lawn pretty much
in the dark with snow everywhere and when
the set was over I dropped the bar off my
back onto the lawn because I always squat
to complete failure back at that time.
And then I would take the weights off the
bar, re-balance the bar, put the weights back
on and then do my neck set.
The third thing, and this was back when it
was considered mandatory that you had to eat
every two to three hours or you would instantly
go catabolic and lose all of your gains, so
this was something that I was constantly worried
about all throughout the day.
I remember going to a party once, a lot of
the time I’d actually avoid going out just
to make sure that I’d get all my nutrition
in, but I did go to this particular party,
but of course I didn’t want to miss out
on my protein so I took MuscleTech Meal Replacement
packet with me and put it in my back pocket
but I didn’t have a shaker cup because I
didn’t want anybody there to see that I
had actually brought this with me.
So right around the three hour mark when I
was about to go catabolic and start losing
all of my muscle, I went into the bathroom
and literally just ate the powder straight
out of the packet.
So I’d put a little bit of water into the
packet and it would form this disgusting,
chunky paste and then I would just chew it
up and swallow it.
And I remember that it was so bad that I was
gagging on it and I actually couldn’t even
finish it.
I think I had to stop before I was about halfway
through.
The fourth thing was skipping class in high
school so that I could nap because I didn’t
sleep well the night before and I had a leg
workout coming up and I didn’t want my performance
to be affected.
So instead of going to class I went out into
the parking lot and slept in my car for about
an hour and a half just so I could rest up
for my workouts later on.
Number five, and this is going to sound a
bit borderline weird but I didn’t do this
on purpose obviously, that was stuffing myself
on so much food that I actually threw up from
it.
Again, this was back when I was basically
thought that I had to eat as much food as
I possibly could in order t get the best gains.
I remember one night, I don’t even remember
exactly what I ate, but I just went overboard
and ate so much food that I literally puked
from it.
And I remember being really pissed off about
that because I had put in all this effort
to get all these calories down but then they
all just ended up in the toilet.
Number six, also involves vomit, I’m sure
this is probably happened to a lot of other
people as well, but that is training so hard
to the point of throwing up.
I think that happened to me at least, probably,
five times or more because just like I thought
that the more food I ate the better gains
I’d make.
I also thought that the more intensity I train
with the more muscle I’d build.
And I remember at one phase in my training
I will literally take every set to all out,
one hundred percent muscular failure and then
I’d just continue pushing against the weight
as hard as I could even after I hit failure
for an extra thirty seconds, which is just
like the dumbest thing ever.
And I would even do this on exercise like
squats and deadlifts, which is hugely dangerous
and totally unnecessary.
At one point in my training almost turn into
this kind of sadistic thing where I would
just put myself through as much pain as possible
just to see how much I could take, to see
how mentally tough I was.
I remember throwing up from squats, deadlifts,
I remember one time it happen from high intensity
cardio on the bike, and I even remember throwing
up once from doing pull-ups, which I don’t
really know how it happened but it did.
I’m sure other people have throwing up on
training too but keep in mind that that should
be an extremely rare thing, if ever, because
training for muscle growth really doesn’t
require you to push yourself that far.
In the saddest end, most pathetic/embarrassing
example of this was right after a prolonged
dreamer bulk where I was eating insane amount
of food and doing zero cardio and I bulked
up to over two hundred and fifteen pounds,
which at five foot nine is pretty heavy, with
my body fat level’s just through the roof
because I didn’t really know what I was
doing back then and I was just trying to get
as massive as possible.
And then I finally decided that it was time
to cut and on the first day back I went to
do cardio, which I hadn’t done in literally
months.
All I was doing during that time was three
low volume weight training workouts per week
and then sitting at my desk or on the couch
and just stuffing my face with food all day
long and working.
So I drove my car to a park to go for a run
and, I shit you not, I literally jogged for
five minutes and I got sick and ended up throwing
up in the parking lot.
It’s pretty sad but that did happened.
And the seventh thing, this was when the recommendation
was to take creatine first thing in the morning
on your off days to maximize absorption.
And I remember this was in high school as
well, I got to school and realized that I
had forgotten to take my creatine so I skipped
class and drove home.
It was literally like thirty or forty minutes
round trip just so I can go home and take
my creatine at the “ideal” time, which
is just crazy to think about now but, again,
something else I did back when bodybuilding
was just my obsession.
And it was just sort of that OCD minds that
kicking in on that one.
Anyway, I’m sure there are plenty more that
I can think of now, plenty more examples of
this but those are just the few ones that
come to mind for this video.
And again, if you guys have any of your own
sort of, obsessive fitness thing that you
did in the past or maybe even that you’re
doing right now, feel free to share them in
the comments below.
Keep in mind guys, that yes, it does take
consistent work and patience to build significant
muscle and really transform your body but
it’s really not that complex and it doesn’t
require total obsession by any means.
A bit of short term obsession is fine at the
start just to get that initial momentum going
but once you settle into it and it becomes
a habit then you’ll see that you really
don’t need to revolve your life around your
fitness program or do any crazy stuff to get
into really good shape.
But I really didn’t know any better back
then so all I can do is take my experience
form that and use it to help other people
who are still in the beginning stages so that
they can get into great shape without going
through those unnecessary extremes.
So thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this was somewhat entertaining.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
The links are in the description.
You can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
System by clicking here or by heading over
to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
That program shows you how to maximize your
muscle building and your fat burning results
in a highly effective but practical and sustainable
way without revolving your whole life around
your fitness plan or overly restricting yourself
in any way.
And if you did enjoy the video, as always
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.