Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in today's video I want to outline 5 simple
tips that you can employ to eliminate wrist
and forearm pain during straight bar curls
for your biceps.
So straight bar curls have always been considered
as the sort of bread and butter of solid biceps
training, but many lifters do tend to end
up with nagging wrist and forearm pain after
performing heavy curls over a period of several
months or years.
So here's what you can do about it.
Tip Number 1 is to lighten up the load.
Now this tip is the most obvious one but if
you're going overboard on total weight and
aren't performing your curls with proper textbook
form at all times, then obviously you're going
to run into problems eventually.
So always make sure that you're using a weight
that you can execute at least 5 perfect reps
with by keeping your elbows pinned at your
sides at all times, your shoulders stationary,
and your back relatively straight, and using
minimal to no momentum as you curl the weights
up and down.
Tip Number 2 is to align your wrists in a
neutral or slightly extended position.
When most people perform their bicep curls,
they end up flexing their wrist and their
forearm at the same time, and this places
alot of undue stress on these areas that can
definitely add up over time.
So from now on, make sure that your wrist
remains either neutral or even slightly extended
whenever you execute any of your curling movements
because this is going to keep the majority
of the tension on your biceps while taking
the stress off of your wrists and forearms
at the same time.
Tip Number 3 is don't grip the bar too wide
or too narrow.
The proper grip width for a straight bar curl
should be about shoulder width apart, so if
you go too wide, so several inches or more
outside shoulder width, or too narrow, several
inches or more inside shoulder width, you're
going to end up placing your wrists into an
awkward, unnatural position that will greatly
increase the chances of wrist and forearm
pain.
Tip Number 4 is to use an ez curl bar instead
of a straight bar.
If you've employed the previous 3 tips that
I just outlined and you're still experiencing
a reasonable amount of pain, then this is
going to be your next option.
The ez curl bar places your wrists at a slightly
inward angle that puts less overall stress
on your wrists and forearms, however, do keep
in mind that this particular wrist angle also
slightly reduces the tension on the biceps
and instead it shifts some of the load onto
your brachialis, which is a separate muscle
on the side of your arm between your biceps
and your triceps.
And because of this, I would only recommend
making this switch to the ez curl bar if you
can't find any way to make your straight bar
curls more comfortable.
And Tip Number 5 is to ditch the barbells
altogether and use dumbbells instead.
With dumbbells there's virtually no limit
to the different grips and angles that you
can place your wrists at, so go ahead and
try experimenting with some different variations
until you find one that is most comfortable
for you, whether that means performing them
with your palms up, performing them in a twisting
supinating fashion, or just using a pure hammer
grip, but also keep in mind that, like the
ez curl bar, using a pure hammer style grip
is also going to shift some of stress off
of your biceps and onto your brachialis.
So to quickly recap the 5 tips that I just
outlined to help you eliminate wrist and forearm
pain during bicep curls.
Number 1, make sure you're using a weight
that you can execute at least 5 reps with
in perfect form.
Number 2, keep your wrist at a neutral or
slightly extended angle as you curl the weight
up and down.
Number 3, always use a grip that is roughly
shoulder width apart.
Number 4, if those 3 tips don't solve the
problem then use an ez curl bar instead of
a straight bar.
And number 5, you can experiment with different
grips and angles using dumbbells until you
find a variation that is most comfortable
for you.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found this information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.