Most companies are just looking to make money
and they increase their profit margins by
using minimal dosages and charging top dollar
for their supplements that don't work.
What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, realscienceathletics.com.
And in this video today, we are doing a supplement
review.
Something that I haven't done in quite a long
time.
And today we are looking at none other than
V Shred.
What's going on, guys?
Who now has a supplement line that goes by
the name Sculptnation.
They've got a variety of different products,
but someone recently sent me a message over
on Instagram saying that I should take a look
at their pre-workout product because it was,
in their words, "One of the worst pre-workout
formulas they had ever seen."
Now, I would personally never say something
like that.
This is just something that I heard from someone
else who isn't me, but I figured I'd take
a look anyway and give you guys a step by
step breakdown of the product, since they
do have a very large following.
And they also do a ton of paid advertising
as well.
And so, naturally, there are going to be a
lot of people out there who are purchasing
this product.
Now, Vince Sant, who is the face of V Shred,
V Shred itself is actually made up of a group
of internet marketers, fitness experts.
But Vince has gotten a lot of attention over
the past year for allegedly putting out highly
inaccurate information on a consistent basis.
I'm talking about the Romanian deadlift.
That is just when you see people stepping
up to the bar, they have their feet about
shoulder width apart, feet slightly pointed
outwards, and they grab this bar just outside
of their shins.
And they pull this straight up their legs,
they drive their hips forward, lock out their
glutes ...
And for allegedly plagiarizing large amounts
of content.
Now, I don't know whether or not any of that
is actually true.
And I really don't know why Vince gets so
much hate because, quite honestly, I think
he's extremely knowledgeable, he's articulate,
and he gives a very well thought out training
advice.
But there's a better way to do it because
when you are doing ... and this goes for any
cable extension ... any tricep extension on
the cable.
When you're doing a tricep extension on a
cable, right here, what happens is yes, right
here.
And then, first off, when you're doing this
a common issue I see ... And you're going
to at the top of the exercise ...
Not only that, but his understanding of nutrition
also seems to be really on point.
And I've seen him give some unique insights
that I've personally never even thought of
before.
Making sure that you're getting the lower
sugar ones.
This is the 50% less sugar, maple and brown
sugar instant oats.
The ones that aren't lower sugar are, obviously,
going to have a lot more sugar in them.
And so, that's going to make it a lot more,
a lot unhealthier of an option.
In fact, Vince is so advanced and on such
a high level that he has somehow figured out
how to, essentially, make his muscles grow
at will.
For example, Vince is able to build his chest
while performing movements that don't even
activate the pecs or place them under any
resistance whatsoever.
Flex.
Turn.
Turn back straight.
Flex, turn, really focusing on squeezing down
on your pec, right here, holding that flex,
holding that flex, holding that flex.
He has literally transcended the laws of biomechanics.
And I really think that the people criticizing
him are just haters, who are jealous and angry
because they can't comprehend just how advanced
he really is.
What's going on guys?
So, given how excellent Vince's training and
nutrition advice is, I can only assume that
his supplement line follows suit.
Today, we're going to take a more detailed
look at his Pre Workout, but he's also got
several other really great products as well.
For example, a testosterone booster.
It doesn't matter that not a single natural
compound has ever been shown in research to
increase testosterone levels high enough to
actually measurably impact muscle growth,
if Vince says that it works in spite of overwhelming
scientific evidence based on hundreds of studies,
then I think that Test Boost is well worth
the $49.
The ingredients in Test Boost are amazing
and nothing extra is required.
You'll burn more fat without more cardio,
you'll build more muscle without lifting more.
You'll become a beast in the bedroom without
having to play mind tricks on yourself.
They've also got a natural human growth hormone
booster, same concept as the testosterone
booster in that, okay so, all the studies
show that they don't actually work for increasing
and sustaining growth hormone levels high
enough to actually alter body composition
in any significant way.
But the Sculptnation website says that this
product is a, "Shortcut to your dream body
that will help you rapidly gain muscle and
lose fat," so how can you say no to that?
They also offer a super affordable creatine
product.
It's only $37 for 198 grams, which is just
9 cents per gram.
It's only about six times the cost of most
other creatine monohydrate products, so that's
not too bad.
It's not like it's 10 or 15 times the cost,
it's only six times the cost.
They've got BCAAs, which is great, if you're
looking for something to flavor your water
with.
And even better, they have a nighttime fat
burner, which helps you, "Melt fat 24/7, especially
while you sleep, and zap the fat once it enters
your bloodstream."
Fantastic.
What's going on guys?
So, let's do a more detailed breakdown of
their pre-workout, which goes by the name,
Pre Workout.
Now, the idea that this is literally the worst
pre-workout formula on the market is totally
unfair.
I would never say such a thing or even think
such a thing, and I'm going to prove it to
you by giving a step by step analysis of the
ingredients and the dosages based on what
the research studies say.
And I will link those studies in the description
box below, if you want to verify all of this
for yourself.
So let's take a look.
So, first up, we have three grams of branch
chain amino acids.
So yes, as long as you're consuming enough
daily protein, then BCAAs, technically, are
completely unnecessary and they won't have
any muscle building or muscle sparing effect
whatsoever.
And three grams really isn't that much, either.
Usually, a typical pre-workout dose would
be somewhere between about 5 to 10 grams,
but BCAAs have been around for such a long
time and they have so much marketing hype
behind them that they are quite helpful for
producing an intro workout placebo effect.
And the placebo effect is real, and it can
give you an actual measurable improvement
in training performance.
So, I think the use of BCAAs is perfectly
justified here.
Next up we have beta alanine.
Now, beta alanine can produce a few percent
increase in strength on higher rep sets, lasting
60 seconds or more.
And the V Shred Pre Workout provides 1.2 grams
per serving, which is a little bit more than
one half of the absolute minimum effective
research study dose of 2 grams with the usual
beta alanine dose being somewhere between
3.2 to 6.4 grams.
So, that's something, I mean, they used a
research backed ingredient and put a tiny
bit in.
And beta alanine also produces that tingly
feeling on your skin when you take it which,
again, is great in terms of the placebo effect.
After that, we have L-tyrosine.
Now, this is actually a compound that I really
like.
It's why I included it in our Real Science
Athletics pre-workout Pure Form, which was
formulated by me using actual evidence-based
ingredients in their full clinical dosages.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box if you want to
check that out.
But tyrosine is useful for improving focus
and reducing fatigue during intense exercise.
We use 3000 milligrams in pure form because
that's a safe and effective dose that falls
in line with the research study dose of anywhere
between 500 to 7,000 milligrams.
And the V Shred Pre Workout is also fine because
it provides 1000 milligrams per serving.
Wait, shit, that's 100 milligrams per serving.
Well, the absolute minimum effective dose
is 500 milligrams, so it does give you one
fifth of that.
So, for people who are freakishly unbelievably
sensitive to pre-workout supplements, you
might feel something very minor off of that,
probably not, but it's something.
So, moving on.
The next ingredient on the list is betaine
anhydrous.
And it's also got [bea-tine 00:07:56], which
has been researched and shown to increase
muscle power.
Okay so, Vince doesn't know how to pronounce
the ingredients in his own product.
That's fine.
Maybe it was written wrong on a teleprompter
and Vince got confused for a moment.
It happens.
It seems to happen pretty frequently in his
case, but I don't think that that means that
he doesn't actually know anything about these
ingredients or their proper dosages, and is
just completely talking out of his ass.
That would be a very unfair accusation that
I would never make.
What's going on guys?
Now, there is conflicting research on this
compound.
It has been shown to be effective in some
studies for modestly increasing strength and
power, but the mechanism does overlap with
creatine.
And so, it's possible that if you're already
taking creatine, then you're not going to
get any extra benefit, but they did choose
to include it here.
I think that that's generally okay.
The usual dose for improving workout performance
is 2 1/2 grams.
The absolute minimum active dose is 500 milligrams
and our supplement expert extraordinaire,
Vince here, put in 100 milligrams.
Hmm?
Yeah, 100 milligrams.
I know, this is fucking ridiculous.
So, again, one fifth of the absolute minimum
effective dose, but what are you going to
do?
Vince has a decent physique and thick lustrous
hair, so say what you want science, obviously,
it's working regardless and you should just
stop being such a hater.
The next ingredient is L-citrulline, a good
research backed ingredient for reducing fatigue,
improving training performance and reducing
muscle soreness.
We included it in Pure Form as citrulline
malate with six grams total per serving.
And the V Shred workout has one and a half
grams.
So, again, right ... And then, lastly, there's
a combination of 300 milligrams of caffeine
with 50 milligrams of L-theanine.
Okay so, one might say that it's a little
bit odd that in an older, separate YouTube
video Vince actually advises against caffeine
doses in the 300 milligram range, because
he says that it's too high.
Find one with caffeine in it, maybe not one
with 350 milligrams, like I've seen some pre-workouts.
Maybe down in the 200 milligram range.
But, look, we can argue back and forth about
the fact that every single ingredient in the
Sculptnation Pre Workout is technically completely
and totally under dosed based on what the
research studies say, and that they probably
won't have any measurable effect on your workouts
whatsoever, according to the research.
If that's what you're saying, go ahead.
I didn't personally say that, but one might
theoretically say that.
But it really doesn't matter because the bottom
line is that there's a fairly large dose of
caffeine included here, which will give you
a noticeable boost.
So, even if all the other ingredients aren't
actually doing anything at all, you're still
going to think that they are, and the product
technically will still "work" for giving you
more energy during your workout.
Most companies are just looking to make money
and they increase their profit margins by
using minimal dosages and charging top dollar
for their supplements that don't work.
So what's the bottom line here, guys?
I think that Vince and the V Shred crew are
an honest, respectable, and highly knowledgeable
team of internet marketer, fitness experts.
I don't think the fact that Vince seems to
always fumble over his words when he tries
to recommend the product in his videos means
that secretly deep down, he knows that it's
bullshit.
And he realizes that he doesn't actually know
what he's talking about.
But this actually just helps give me energy.
It's got a little caffeine in it.
It's got a little caffeine in it.
So, this is great to take before every single
one of your workouts, before every single
one of your workouts.
Really good, if you're trying to put on muscle.
I don't think he's internally conflicted about
consciously choosing monetary gain over honesty
and transparency.
Hey, Vince here.
And if you're looking for a way to take your
performance in the gym, your energy in the
gym, your mood and your focus at the gym,
and even your results after the gym to the
next level, you have to try Pre Workout by
Sculptnation.
If that's what other people think, then that's
their opinion.
I don't think that's the case.
I don't think that Vince is only in it for
the money, as I've heard others say in other
videos.
I think he's just passionate about helping
people and that this powdered caffeine ... Pre
Workout supplement, I think it's well worth
the $37.
So, thanks for watching guys.
I hope you found this review helpful.
Make sure to hit that like button, leave a
comment and subscribe, if you haven't already.
You can follow me over on Instagram as well
for more daily, no nonsense fitness tips.
And if you do want to check out Pure Form,
which is our evidence-based pre-workout formulated
with actual research backed ingredients, in
their full effective dosages, based on legitimate
studies that will actually help to improve
your strength, energy, and focus during workouts,
then you can head over to realscienceathletics.com
by clicking up here, or by using the link
in the description box below.
And you can use coupon code YOUTUBE15 to save
15% off your first order.
Thanks again, guys.
And I will see you in the next video.