Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com and in today's
video I want to address the topic of how to
get rid of lower abdominal fat.
Now, I fully understand just how frustrating
this can be.
You've been training hard and dieting for
weeks, you're making consistent ongoing progress,
your entire body is looking decently lean,
you've got some nice vascularity going on,
but you've still got that one last roll or
two of lower belly fat that won't seem to
go away no matter what you do.
Well, it may not be the answer that you were
hoping to hear, but this is really the dead
simple reality, and that is that there are
no special techniques or special strategies
that will specifically allow you to target
your lower belly fat.
The only way to get rid of that last bit of
fat is by continuing with your fat loss program
and focusing on lowering your overall body
fat percentage.
As I've covered many times before, it is impossible
for you to spot reduce fat from specific areas
of your body.
The resistance based exercises that you perform
in the gym only train the muscles that are
involved in the specific movements that you're
performing, but this has no affect on the
fat stores in and around the area that you're
training.
Bench presses do not burn fat off of your
chest, bicep curls do not burn fat off of
your biceps, and lower ab exercises do not
burn fat from your lower abs.
Fat loss only occurs on a holistic total body
scale as you maintain a net calorie deficit.
Over time through proper nutrition and increased
activity level and due to the way that our
bodies are genetically programmed to store
fat, the very last area that fat will be burned
from is the lower abdominal region.
So just because you have some excess fat remaining
on your lower stomach, it doesn't mean that
you're doing something wrong or that there
is a specific fat burning technique that you
aren't properly employing.
All it really means is that you haven't lowered
your overall body fat percentage far enough.
The only solution is to stick to your diet
plan, keep hammering the weights and stay
consistent with your cardio.
Losing lower belly fat is really just about
patience and perserverance.
Now, if your overall fat burning progress
has plateaued then you simply need to create
a larger calorie deficit in order to stimulate
ongoing fat loss and you can achieve this
by either shaving one or two hundred calories
off of your daily intake, increasing your
activity level with some additional cardio
exercise, or through some combination of both.
As you continue to lean down further and further
eventually that lower abdominal fat will begin
to melt away.
One other note that I'd like to mention before
closing out this video is to keep in mind
that for the vast majority of people and even
for those who are in really good overall shape,
having some degree of noticeable lower belly
fat is perfectly normal.
Don't let your perception be skewed here.
All those pictures that you see online and
in the magazines of fitness models with ripped
8-packs all year round, you know, this only
represents an extreme minority of the population.
It would require a very high level of time
effort and dedication to achieve a mid-section
of that caliber assuming that you have average
genetics and that you're not "chemically enhanced"
in any way.
Wanting to reduce your lower abdominal fat
is obviously fine but just keep in mind that
being perfectly flat and ripped in this area
does require you to be quite lean overall
and to maintain that level of leanness on
an ongoing basis, and for most people this
is definitely not going to be easy.
Personally I'm content at remaining at a body
fat percentage in the 10 or 12 percent range
most of the time with visible but certainly
not shredded abs and with a bit of extra lower
ab fat.
For me the input/output that would be required
to have a ripped six pack all year round just
isn't worth it.
That's just me though, and the degree of overall
leanness that you truly want to achieve and
the amount of time and effort that you're
willing to expend to reach that goal is totally
up to you and it's something that you'll have
to decide for yourself.
So thanks alot for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did find the information helpful please
make sure to hit the "like" button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTranformationTruth.com.
The link for that is up in the corner of the
video here or you can click the link in the
description box below.
And make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates, the link for that
is also in the description box.
Talk to you again soon.