Hey, what's up?
This is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want to answer a reasonably common
question I get, which is what to do if you
have one arm that's bigger than the other?
Now, this is pretty common.
And anyone who trains with weights will tend
to have one side of their body that's dominant
over the other side to some degree.
But if one side of your body is starting to
take over and become significantly bigger
or stronger than the other, whether it's your
biceps, triceps or even one side of your chest
or your lats, I'm going to explain here very
briefly how to fix it using two simple steps.
So, the first step is to switch to exercises
that allow each side of your body to move
independently.
When you perform barbell exercises or machine
lifts where both arms work together to move
the weight, one arm will always have a chance
to cheat for the other.
The body is incredibly smart, and it's always
trying to find the most efficient way to keep
that bar moving, whether it's a barbell bench
press, a military press or a barbell curl,
the dominant side can often end up taking
the majority of the load.
So, start putting all your focus on unilateral
movements.
You know, if you have one arm bigger than
the other and you usually do barbell curls,
just switch to dumbbell curls instead.
Instead of barbell bench presses, you do dumbbell
bench presses.
If you're doing ez-bar skull crushers, then
use -- do dumbbell skull crushers from now
on.
And this goes for machines as well.
You'll want to ditch any machine exercises
where both arms have to work together to move
the weight stack, and focus on unilateral
machine exercises only.
For example, if you regularly do straight
bar cable curl, start doing them with a single
handle one arm at a time.
If you do straight bar tricep press-downs,
do single arm press-downs.
If you do straight bar lat pull-downs, then
find a machine with independent hands.
You get the idea.
Step number two is to focus on taking the
weaker arm to muscular failure, but don't
perform any additional reps with the stronger
arm.
So, let's use the alternating dumbbell curl
as an example, assuming that your left side
is the weaker side.
You'd start by curling the dumbbell with your
left hand for your first rep, and then you'd
perform your second rep with the right arm,
the stronger arm, and then of course you're
going to continue alternating back and forth.
And as soon as your weaker arm hits muscular
failure, you're going to match that rep with
your stronger side.
And then you're just going to stop the set
right there.
So, if you just barely squeezed out say, seven
reps with your left arm, you'd perform the
seven rep with your stronger arm, and then
you can just stop the set, no matter how much
strength is left in that stronger arm.
Another example might be for a one arm tricep
pushdown.
You do your first set with your left arm.
And let's say, you hit muscular failure after
six reps, you'd then perform your second set
with the right arm, and you'd stop at rep
six as well.
Even if you could do three more with your
right arm, you're still going to stop at six
reps.
So, by following this method, the weaker arm
gets greater stimulation by going all the
way to failure, while the stronger arm stop
short of muscular failure.
So, this basically allows you to maintain
the size and strength in your dominant side
while allowing the weaker side to catch up.
Now, a common misconception is the idea that
you should actually perform additional sets
for the weaker arm.
But logically, this makes no sense, because
if doing three extra sets allows a particular
muscle to grow faster, then the implication
is that all along you could have been performing
those three extra sets and growing faster.
In reality, more volume does not necessarily
mean more growth, you know.
You can only stimulate so much muscle growth
in a given workout, obviously.
And there's a finite volume -- volume limit
where any additional work is not going to
produce additional gain.
So, my point here is that the only way to
correct an imbalance like this is to actually
ease off of the stronger side with lower intensity,
while maintaining your regular maximum intensity
on the weaker side.
But training both sides with equal intensity
and then, adding more sets to try to super
charge the weaker side, really doesn't make
any sense.
So, to sum this up; if you have one arm that
is bigger than the other or one side of your
body that's bigger than the other, you want
to switch entirely to unilateral movements.
And you want to focus on taking the weaker
side to muscular failure.
And then perform the same number of reps with
the stronger side, but nothing more.
If you follow this method consistently, the
weaker side will gradually catch up until
the imbalance is no longer noticeable.
So, thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found this useful.
To get your complete fully structured muscle
building program that includes a free workout
plan, free meal plan and free supplement plan,
make sure to sign up for the "No Fail" system
over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description bar.
Also make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night.
And make sure to subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all of our future video lessons.
So, thanks again for watching this video lesson.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.