Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com.
In this video today I want to discuss bro
splits, whether they’re effective for natural
trainees and how they stack up against other
popular higher frequency routines like a full
body, an upper/lower or legs/push/pull.
So for those of you who don’t know, a typical
bro split is where you split your muscles
up over usually 4-6 weekly workouts, and then
you train each individual muscle group once
per week.
So something like back on day 1, chest on
day 2, arms on day 3, legs on day 4 etcetera.
Now over the last few years, bro splits have
gotten a lot of criticism in the bodybuilding
community for being a “waste of time”
with most people saying that a natural lifter
will see faster progress using a program that
hits each individual muscle group at a higher
overall frequency.
And all in all, this is basically true; hitting
each muscle group directly only once per week
is probably not going to be the optimal approach
for the average lifter who wants to see progress
at the fastest possible rate.
And this is because a given muscle just simply
doesn’t require a full week of rest in order
to fully recover from the previous workout.
In most cases, 3-4 days will probably be enough
for full recovery and growth to take place,
and at that point the particular muscle group
could be trained again.
So by using a once-per-week bro split training
approach, you basically leave your muscles
“idle” for several days out of the week
where they could be trained again and a new
“growth period” could be stimulated, but
instead they just rest.
For example, if you trained your chest twice
per week using like a basic upper/lower split,
you’d end up with 104 individual “growth
periods” over the course of 1 year for that
muscle, in comparison to 52 growth periods
that you’d get by only training it once
per week.
And this is why I generally recommend either
an upper/lower split done 4 days per week
or a legs/push/pull split done 4-5 days per
week for most people.
That type of routine still allows for enough
total volume and “focus” for each individual
muscle group in a given workout, but it also
lets you comfortably hit those muscles at
a higher frequency of somewhere around once
every 3-5 days.
So, we’ve established that a typical “bro
split” is probably not going to be the optimal
approach for people who want to build muscle
as quickly as possible, however, the fact
that it isn’t optimal doesn’t mean that
it isn’t effective and it doesn’t mean
that it doesn't work.
When it all comes down to it, ANY bodybuilding
approach that lets you train a given muscle
group with enough volume and intensity and
that allows for progressive increases in weight
over time is still going to produce consistent
gains in muscle size and strength, and a typical
bro split will definitely still accomplish
that, and a lot lifters (myself included)
have seen perfectly reasonable gains from
week to week using this exact type of approach.
Now again, a bro split likely won’t have
you building muscle at the same rate as you
would on a higher frequency program, but you’re
still going to make impressive gains either
way.
For a lot of lifters out there, a 4-6 day
per week split is just a more enjoyable way
to work out, because a lot of people find
that it just leaves them feeling more motivated
and more excited to train.
And I fully get that, because there definitely
is something fun about being able to just
go into the gym and really “pump up” just
1 or 2 muscle groups with a wider variety
of exercises and more total volume, and the
truth is that if this workout style maximizes
your overall consistency and you just prefer
it because it’s more fun for you, then I
really don’t see anything wrong with using
it, even if it’s just for temporary cycles
of training.
I’d also make the argument that even though
the differences in overall progress between
someone using a bro split and someone one
using a higher frequency routine will probably
be fairly noticeable in the initial stages
of the training program, they'll still tend
to level out over time, and this is because
there are very steep diminishing returns in
muscle growth the longer that you’ve been
training, and there’s only a limited amount
of muscle that a natural trainee can gain
in the first place.
So even though something like an upper/lower
split or a legs/push/pull routine would almost
certainly give you faster gains right "out
of the gate", after maybe 4 or 5 plus years
of hard training and proper nutrition, the
differences between that and a standard bro
split in terms of pure muscle growth would
probably be fairly small because both approaches
are still going to ultimately allow you to
make gains close to your genetic potential
over the long term anyway.
So, in my opinion, the 2 key points to take
away here are, number 1, if your goal is to
make the fastest and the most efficient muscle
gains possible regardless of the specific
routine, then a bro split is likely not going
to be your ideal choice.
And instead I'd recommend that you go with
something that hits each muscle group closer
to around twice per week, so an upper/lower
done 4 times per week or a legs/push/pull
split done 4-5 times per week, or even a full
body routine done 3 days per week.
And number 2, if you just prefer a bro split
because you find that it makes your training
more fun and it's more motivating for you,
and you're also aware of the fact that it
probably won't be optimal for building muscle
at the fastest rate at least in the short
term, but you’d just prefer to use it anyway,
then the choice is completely up to you.
There's really nothing wrong with using a
bro split and you'll still make significant
gains following one, but it just might take
you a longer period of time to see the same
gains in comparison to somebody who is using
a higher frequency routine.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
To learn a ton of other science based, no
B.S training, nutrition and supplementation
information to maximize your muscle building
and your fat burning progress, make sure to
head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and
grab my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.