Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video lesson I want to outline 6 common bodybuilding
nutrition myths that you should definitely
be aware of.
Now balancing your fitness program with your
career and your friends, and your family and
all of your other hobbies and pursuits is
hard enough work as it is and the last thing
you need on top of this is to waste valuable
energy and time on useless, ineffective nutritional
techniques that really do nothing but make
your life more complicated.
Proper bodybuilding nutrition is actually
pretty straightforward, and you really don't
need to employ anything anything overly fancy
or complicated in order for your results to
be maximized.
So avoiding these 6 myths is going to make
your life a heck of a lot easier, it's going
to make your diet far easier to follow and
it will still yield the same muscle building
and fat burning results that you're after.
So, Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #1 is that
you must consume a meal every 2-3 hours throughout
the day in order to maximize muscle growth
and fat loss.
Now the idea behind these frequent feedings
is that eating every 2 to 3 hours throughout
the day, which usually means about 6 meals,
is going to keep your body in an anabolic
state and it's going to keep your fat burning
metabolism elevated by keeping you out of
"starvation mode".
Now the reality here is that digestion and
absorption is an incredibly gradual process,
and most standard sized meals that you consume
throughout the day are going to keep your
body in a net anabolic state for around 5-7
hours, and not only that, but there's actually
quite a bit of research directly examining
the effects of meal frequency on metabolic
rate, with frequent feedings showing no marked
improvements and in fact, some of those studies
that are available actually show less frequent
feedings to be superior for fat loss.
So if you want to maximize muscle growth and/or
fat loss, just focus on meeting your total
protein, carb and fat requirements over the
course of the day as a whole.
Lay it out in a way that fits your schedule
best and that falls best into your natural
hunger patterns.
You're going to end up getting the same basic
results and without the headache that comes
with obsessing about getting a meal in every
few hours.
Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #2 is that you
must consume a whey protein shake immediately
following your workout in order to prevent
muscle catabolism and to kick-start the recovery
process.
Once again, digestion and absorption is a
very gradual process, and as long as you consume
a meal of some kind within a few hours leading
up to your workout, those same nutrients that
you consumed are still being broken down and
utilized even after your workout session is
over.
So slamming a protein shake within 37 seconds
of finishing your last rep isn't going to
hurt, but it's definitely not mandatory either.
If you want to wait an hour or two or even
more it's really not going to make any noticeable
difference to your results.
Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #3 is that you
must avoid consuming carbohydrates in the
evening in order to prevent excess fat storage.
So every day, your body expends a certain
number of calories and calories are ultimately
just a measurement of energy in order to fuel
natural bodily processes, like breathing and
digestion and circulation, plus all of the
additional activities that you perform throughout
the day.
And in order to lose body fat, you have to
create a “calorie deficit” by taking in
fewer calories than you burn.
And this stimulates your body to tap into
its excess fat stores in order to obtain a
source of fuel.
Now as long as that calorie deficit is consistently
kept in place, the specific timing of your
carbohydrate consumption is not going to make
any difference in the overall picture.
Fat loss and fat gain is not an "on/off" switch.
Both processes are happening simultaneously.
So whether you burn more fat earlier in the
day and store more later on, or store more
fat earlier in the day and burn more later
on, the net result is still going to be the
same as long as your total calorie intake
remains constant.
Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #4 is that you
must avoid eating carbs before bed in order
to prevent excess fat storage.
Now this is really the same logic as the previous
myth.
Fat loss and fat gain is going to be determined
by your overall net energy balance.
So as long as your calorie intake and your
activity level are remaining constant throughout
your program, it really makes no difference
whether you burn or store more fat earlier
in the day or burn or store more fat later
in the day.
The net result is ultimately going to be the
same regardless of the nutrient timing.
It's really just a basic matter of energy
consumed versus energy burned.
As long as you're tracking your total calorie
intake with reasonable accuracy each day then
you can ultimately eat whenever you feel like
it without having to worry.
Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #5 is that you
must stick to slow-absorbing carbohydrates
on the low end of the glycemic index and the
glycemic index or the GI for short is a chart
that ranks carbohydrates from 0 to 100 based
on how quickly or slowly they raise blood
sugar levels in a 2-hour period after they
are consumed.
And the idea here is that consuming carbs
on the lower end of the scale is going to
provide you with a "steady stream" of sugars
rather than a quick spike, which will, in
turn, prevent excess fat storage.
Now here are the two main problems, among
many, with the glycemic index.
Number 1, The GI rankings are based on the
glycemic effects of the specific foods that
you're consuming in an isolated and fasted
state.
So aside from first thing in the morning,
you're never going to be consuming your carbohydrates
sources in a fasted state anyway.
A typical bodybuilding nutrition plan will
always combine carbohydrates with fats and
protein.
So when you consume your carbohydrates as
part of a complete meal the glycemic response
can be dramatically altered.
So as long as the majority of your carbohydrate
intake is coming from minimally refined, high
fiber sources, the glycemic index rankings
are essentially useless.
And Bodybuilding Nutrition Myth #6 is that
you must "eat clean" 24/7 if you really want
to get into impressive shape.
Now I've said this many times before but your
body can't recognize individual food items
as separate entities.
It doesn't say "that's a chicken breast, that's
an apple and that's a cup of rice".
It only sees your complete diet as a whole
- the total protein, the carbs, the fats,
the micronutrients, the fiber, the phytonutrients,
etcetera, that you're consuming each day.
So as long as the majority, around 80 to 90%
of your diet is being derived from "clean"
sources, which is lean, high quality protein
and minimally refined high fiber carbs and
healthy fats, and your vitamin and mineral
and other micronutrient needs are being sufficiently
met then slipping in some "cheat foods" to
fill in the remaining 10 to 20% is really
not going to make any difference to your results.
What it WILL do, however, is make your overall
life more enjoyable while still yielding the
same results as the next guy who is eating
nothing but chicken and broccoli and brown
rice 24 hours a day.
So I hope you found these 6 points useful
and that you'll incorporate this advice into
your own diet in order to keep things more
streamlined and simple for yourself.
So if you did enjoy the video, as always,
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box,
and make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.