Hey, what's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, www.SeanNal.com.
Just got back from the gym.
Wanted to make a quick video here talking
about the topic of man boobs and how to get
rid of them.
Now, it is a pretty silly term but it is a
very common term as well, and it is a very
common question that I get asked by guys out
there so I did want to make a video addressing
it.
So, how do you get rid of man boobs?
The first thing to take into account is the
fact that man boobs doesn't have one single
individual cause.
It can actually be caused by two different
things or a combination of both.
It's either going to be an issue of excess
chest fat, which is very simple and pretty
straightforward to fix.
And the second one, that's a little bit more
complicated, is gynecomastia or gyno for short.
So the first step here is that you need to
identify what the specific issue is that you're
actually dealing with.
So how do you go about doing that?
First off if it's gyno, basically this is
caused by an actual increase in the breast
tissue itself which is a result of hormonal
imbalances and it usually happens at two main
periods in life, that's either going to be
during puberty or later on when testosterone
levels begin to decline, sort of around the
40-plus age range.
Now, if you have gyno it's going to be a little
bit more obvious.
The man boobs, whatever you want to call them,
it's going to be more focused around the nipple
area and you're going to kind of, if you feel
around in there you'll sort of notice kind
of a hard mass that's located underneath there
and it's going to be also a little more puffy
or sort of in the nipple area, it's going
to be a little bit more obvious.
Whereas if you're dealing with excess chest
fat it's basically just going to be like any
excess fat on any other area of your body
and it'll be distributed around the entire
chest area, not necessarily just around the
nipple area.
So if it's just basic excess chest fat there's
not going to be any hard mass it'll just be
again basic flab, essentially, that is covering
the whole test area.
So, how do you go about dealing with either
issue?
Well, first off if you have a legitimate case
of gyno, unfortunately that's something that
you have to discuss with your doctor.
Because if it is actual gyno that you have
just basic diet and exercise probably is not
going to get rid of it and it is going to
require surgical intervention to truly eliminate
it.
So if you have an obvious case of gyno where
you're not significantly overweight, you're
not carrying a lot of other fat around your
chest, then I would encourage you to probably
just go talk to your doctor first and foremost.
If you're dealing with excess chest fat on
the other hand, there's really nothing complicated
about it at all.
And this is really just a simple issue of
lowering your overall body fat percentage
as a whole.
As I've talked about many times before and
as you've probably heard elsewhere you can't
actually spot reduce fat from specific areas
of your body.
So if you have man boobs and excess chest
fat there, going into the gym and doing bench
presses and flies and push-ups and exercises
like that, that is going to build the Pec
muscle underneath but it's not really going
to do anything to specifically hone in on
the fat that's covering your chest.
The only way to get rid of excess chest fat
or excess fat from any other area of your
body in general is just through a basic fat
loss program.
Now, I'm not going to go into all the details
about how a fat loss program should be structured
in this video.
I've got many other videos talking about that.
Again, it's just a basic issue of keeping
yourself in a calorie deficit over time through
proper nutrition, weight training, cardio,
a combination of all three, and again, just
focusing on lowering your overall body fat
percentage.
As you lower your overall body fat percentage
that excess chest fat and those man boobs
will gradually disappear.
Now, on the other hand if you're not actually
quite sure what it is that you're dealing
with, if you do have excess chest fat and
you might also be dealing with gyno you're
not quite sure, then my recommendation is
to start off with a fat loss program first.
Focus on lowering your overall body fat percentage
and then once you've leaned down significantly,
then you can reassess and see what to do from
there.
So if you do get rid of that excess chest
fat but you find that there is gyno going
on there as well and it is to a significant
degree, then you can go see your doctor.
But if it is a combination of both and you're
not quite sure start with a fat loss program
first before making any other decisions.
So, thanks for watching this video, guys.
I hope you found these tips helpful.
Make sure to like, comment, subscribe, share.
You can check out my Body Transformation Blueprint
system if you do want to grab a step-by-step
fat loss approach over at www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
And the link for that is also in the description
box.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest
content and other updates.
Talk to you guys again soon.