What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and today I wanted to address the topic of
the barbell row versus dumbbell row and explain
why for muscle building purposes I believe
that dumbbell rows are the superior choice
in most cases.
Now I’m obviously not saying that barbell
row is not an effective exercise, obviously
it is and it does work well and there are
plenty of people out there with impressive
backs who do use barbell rows in their programs
but there are a few reasons why it’s usually
a less than optimal choice if you’re trying
to build up your mid-back and your lats as
effectively as possible.
The main reason is just the fact that because
of the position of the exercise where you’re
standing bent over and holding on to a heavy
bar with no chest or lower back support, you
end up having to resort a lot of extra effort
just to maintain the proper posture for the
exercise.
Your spinal erectors, your glutes, your hamstrings
all of this have to kick into high gear just
to keep your body in the right position which
reduces the amount of focuses that you can
place on what really matters during the exercise,
which is providing maximum stimulation to
your lats and your mid-back muscles.
A lot of time when people perform standard
bent over barbell rows especially beginners,
they end up having to stop the set not because
their lats and mid-back muscles truly begin
failing, but instead because of fatigue in
the lower back and legs.
Now I know that a lot of people will say that
this is actually a good thing because it makes
it more of a functional movement but if you’re
already doing a variations of squats and deadlifts
and other posterior chain exercises then that
area is already being train effectively and
there’s really no reason to be using a barbell
row for that purpose, especially when the
goal of the row is to train your lats and
your mid-back, and if you’re performing
big compound movements like squats, deadlifts
and other similar exercises then you’ll
actually want to keep your lower back fresh
for those exercises rather than overly fatiguing
it on other lifts during the week.
So it’s for those reasons that when it comes
to free weight rows I prefer one armed dumbbell
rows instead because they’ll keep you lower
back and your legs supported and let you put
all of your focus where it should be, which
is on training your lats and you mid-back
as hard as you can without having to put a
bunch of energy into maintaining the proper
posture, and on top of that it will reduce
lower back fatigue so that you’ll be stronger
on your other compound lifts, again, legs,
squats and deadlifts.
It will reduce the chance of lower back injury
as well.
Again, of course one other benefit is that
each arm will be trained independently and
this gives you a more natural movements since
both arms won’t be locked on to a fixed
bar and it will prevents size, strength and
balances from side to side.
Now there are quite a few different ways that
one armed dumbbell rows can be preformed but
this how I personally like to do them.
So you’re going to set up an inclined bench
at around 30 to 45 degree angle, stand behind
the bench with your feet about shoulder with
the part, your knees slightly bent and hold
on to a dumbbell using a neutral grip with
your outer hand.
Press your other hand into the bench to support
your upper body and from there, row the dumbbell
up toward your waist until you feel a strong
contraction in your lat and mid-back muscles.
Lower the dumbbell back down until your arm
is extended toward the floor and then repeat.
Few additional tips that you can use to make
the lift even more effective: number on is
to focus on rowing the dumbbell up using your
elbow rather than your hand because that’s
going to help you move more stress onto your
back muscles rather than your biceps and forearms.
Just imagine that your hand in form don’t
even exist and place a hundred percent of
your focus on driving the weight back using
your elbows.
Tips number two is to make to row the dumbbell
on a slight angle rather than straight up
and down.
Thirdly as you row the dumbbell toward yourself
focus on squeezing your shoulder blades together
as well, and then lastly for even more activation
in the back muscles I like to use a set of
lifting straps or lifting hooks because those
will fully eliminate your grip from the equation.
Another option, of course, is to perform you
one armed dumbbell row using a flat bench
and just put one hand and one knee up on the
bench and your other leg out behind you, either
variation is fine and you can use the that
feels most comfortable for you.
Two other dumbbell rowing variations that
you can also check out where you chest and
lower back are supported but both dumbbells
are being rowed at the same time are the dumbbell
seal row and the incline chest supported dumbbell
row.
I’ve done videos on those in the past, so
I’ll just link them in the description box
below if you want to check them out.
So again you can certainly still perform barbell
rows if you like, they’re still an effective
exercise but when it comes to free weight
rows I do think that dumbbell row variations
are the superior choice for the reasons that
I’ve outlined here.
They will train a targeted muscles more effectively
and a more balanced way.
They’ll reduce lower back fatigue as well
as the chances of lower back injury.
So guys if you find this advice helpful and
you want to get all the tools you need to
gain muscle and lose fat as effectively as
possible, you can download my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by going to
www.BodyTransformationTruth.com using the
link in the description box.
Make sure to follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, share, comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.