Hey, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here, www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video today I want to go over
the farmer’s walk, which is the really good
exercise that you can throw in at the end
of a training session as a workout finisher,
if you want to add in some more focused work,
specifically for your grip strength and your
forearm size.
In previous video I talked about why I don’t
recommend using wrist curls or wrist extension
to train your forearms like most people do,
because they don’t allow you to properly
overload your forearms with maximum weight
and because they just flat out dangerous.
But if your forearms or you grip strengths
are something that you really want to build
up then the farmer’s walk is definitely
an exercise that I would recommend trying
out.
It doesn’t just train your forearms either,
you’ll also be hitting your traps pretty
hard as well as getting some stimulation to
your core muscle, your spinal erectors, glutes,
quads and hamstrings.
So it is a multipurpose exercise and it is
highly functional as well.
So the execution here is very simple.
You’re basically just going to pick up a
pair of heavy dumbbells and walk with them.
You can also use kettlebells or sandbags,
or of course you can use actual farmer’s
walk handles.
Basically just any heavy objects that you
can hold at your sides.
But for most people who are watching this,
dumbbells are going to be the obvious choice.
So, stand in between a pair of dumbbells and
squat down so that you’re lifting them off
the ground in a deadlifting motion.
You should be using weight that are fairly
heavy for you, so it’s important you don’t
just yank them off the ground to your lower
back.
Also make sure that you’re gripping the
dumbbells right in the middle, because if
you’re off even slightly then it ends up
affecting the whole set since you’ll be
slightly off balance the whole time.
From there keep your head and be looking straight
ahead.
Have your shoulders pulled back and you chest
up.
Keep your core tight as well as your glutes
tight, and then start walking by using small
quick steps.
Make sure to stay upright the whole time.
Don’t allow your torso to lean forward and
don’t allow your shoulders to roll forward
either.
If you don’t have a ton of space and there’s
a turn in your path, then make sure to always
make that turn very cautiously because, again,
those dumbbells should be pretty heavy for
you and you don’t want to make any sudden
awkward movements.
And you can just continue walking either,
until your grip fully gives out and you have
to set the dumbbells down or until you’ve
covered the set distance that you were aiming
for.
It just depends on what level of intensity
you’re training with.
There’s no one exact distance that you should
cover.
Because, just like you can perform low-medium
and high rep set on other exercises you can
also go with heavier, short distance farmer’s
walk or a lighter, longer distance one.
Or you can just go somewhere in the middle.
And of course, the other option is that you
can just mix it up.
For maximum heavy sets you can walk anywhere
between 10-15 meters.
For medium sets about 20-30 meters and then
for lighter sets around 40-60 meters would
work well.
And in the same way that you aim for progressive
overload on other exercises you also want
to treat your farmer’s walk in the same
way by gradually increasing the distance that
you can walk with a certain weight and by
increasing the actual weight itself overtime.
You can ultimately perform the farmer’s
walk at the end of any workout, but because
they do hit the traps pretty hard they will
fit very well after training your back.
And two to three sets would be pretty standard.
And like I’d mention before, just make sure
to perform these at the end of your workout,
because you don’t want to pre-fatigue your
grip or your other muscle groups prior to
your training sessions with this exercise.
So I would recommend using the farmer’s
walk as a workout finisher.
So thanks for watching, guys.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to get all the tools you need to gain mm and
lose fat as effectively as possible.
The workouts, the meal plans, the supplement
guides and one-on-one coaching then you can
download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video as always make sure
to hit like button, leave a comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.