Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
the Muscle in Minutes Q&A, where I answer
your bodybuilding and fitness questions in
two minutes or less.
Today's question is on the issue of the pump.
Now, this is a question I get all the time.
For those of you who are training intensely
in the gym, you already know what a pump is.
It's that increased in blood flow that you
get to the working muscles while you train.
You're muscles are going to kind of swell
up and feel really tight and engorge with
blood.
It's a great feeling.
But it doesn't actually have anything to do
with hypertrophy.
And so, you strive for a pump during your
workout.
I think in reality here, the answer doesn't
even really matter.
When you go to the gym, if you're training
with any reasonable level of volume or any
reasonable level of intensity, you're going
to get a pump no matter what.
So, whatever potential anabolic affect that
pump has, it's going to happen without you
even trying.
Obviously, the goal is not to strive for a
pump.
So, it doesn't make any sense to say that
you're primary aim when you go to the gym
is to get the biggest pump possible, because
if that were the case, your weight training
workouts will literally consists of you lifting
10lbs or 15lbs dumbbells and pumping out sets
of 100, or 500 or 1,000 reps or more, because
that would obviously give you the biggest
pump possible.
Instead of doing a set of heavy squats, you
know, you could just stand there and do jumping
jacks while you workout, and get a massive
pump in your quads.
But I think anybody with any, you know, reasonable
level of training knowledge, knows that that's
not going to be ideal for stimulating hypertrophy.
So, the simple answer here is forget about
it.
Just don't even worry about the pump.
Go to the gym and focus on what is really
important, which is progressive overload.
So, every time you go to the gym, your primary
goal is to come back stronger than you were
last time.
This is the fundamental baseline factor involved
in building muscle over time.
And that's what you should be putting 100%
of your focus on.
When you train hard, you're going to get a
pump.
It's going to feel great.
And whatever benefit that pump might have,
it's going to take care of itself without
you even trying.
So, just forget about the pump all together.
Focus on progressive overload.
And that's really all there is to it.
So, I hope you found this information useful
today.
If you did enjoy the video, please make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up-to-date on future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free bodybuilding tips.