Hey what’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and today I’m going to be giving you the
simple truth about a subject that pretty much
every single person out there trying to build
muscle wants to know about and that is: how
to build big arms.
I get endless questions about this.
There are million articles and videos out
there discussing it, but the reality is that
it’s actually pretty straight forward.
Now I definitely do recommend that you include
some direct arm training in your workout plan.
So curling movements for your biceps and extension
movements for you triceps but the simple fact
is that the majority of you arm growth will
actually have nothing to do with isolated
arm workouts and it will simply come as a
result of adding overall size and strength
to your larger upper body muscle groups.
In other words if you want to build big arms
the main focus should actually be on achieving
progressive overload on your compound, chest,
shoulder, and back exercises.
So in other words, getting stronger overtime
on your chest presses, shoulder presses, chin-ups,
pulldowns and rows.
By just focusing on adding overall strength
to those basic compound exercises and adding
mast to your larger upper body muscle groups,
your biceps and triceps will automatically
grow along with them.
Your pressing movements will add size to your
triceps and your pulling movements will add
size to your biceps because those smaller
arm muscles are heavily involved and provide
a lot of assistance during those compound
list.
The truth is that even if you never did a
single isolated bicep curl or triceps extension
you could still pretty easily build an impressive
set of arms just through compound pressing
and compound pulling alone.
This is sort of where the problems comes in,
it comes in where guys who were still in the
novice stage and haven’t even really build
up an overall strength and mass foundation,
and they’re looking for the secrets to build
big arms or they say that their arms or leg
won’t grow and they want to what the best
arms workouts are to specifically gain biceps
and triceps size.
Keep in mind that the biceps and triceps are
relatively small muscle groups and it takes
time and patience to build them up significantly.
And obsessing about you arm size before you
have a reasonable amount of training experience
under your belt, it’s really just not something
even worth worrying about.
Again direct arm training is of course something
that I recommend to maximize your results,
but you really don’t need a lot of it and
most of the biceps and triceps growth that
you experience, probably 80, maybe even 90%
of it, it’s simply going to come from consistently
adding weight to the bar on your compound
upper body exercises.
If somebody starts off dumbbell-pressing 40s
and works the way up to pressing 90s there’s
no way that triceps are not going to grow
significantly from that.
Or if you starting off doing pull-ups with
just your body weights and then you’re able
to add an additional 20 pounds, 40 pounds,
60 pounds or more your biceps are going to
grow along significantly as well just from
that and just from continuing to add more
weight.
Yes, if you are more advance lifter who does
have that size and strength foundation and
you legitimately have genetically weak arms
that you want to bring up then yeah, some
specialization training would make sense so
higher volume and higher frequency workouts,
specifically for your biceps and triceps,
but in the vast majority of cases the question
on how to build big arms is dead simple to
answer.
Just keep the training journal and focus on
slowly adding more weight to your compound
presses and pulls.
That’s going to take care of the larger
percentage of your arm gains and then you
can throw in some isolated arm training once
or twice a week just to round things out.
And in terms of isolated arm training I will
provide some links in the description box
below to some videos that I did in the past.
Just outlining some specific biceps and triceps
training tips.
Just to make sure that that are of your program
is carried out as effectively as possible.
Guys if you find this advice helpful and you
want to go get the straight ahead, no B.S.
facts about how you can build muscle and lose
fat as effectively as possible, you can download
my Body Transformation Blueprint System by
clicking here or by going to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the ling in the description box.
You can follow me on social media here if
you weren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, share, comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.