Anyone that's resistance-trained 
most likely has felt the pump.
Simply, it's where the whole 
muscle temporarily increases  
in size due to an accumulation of fluid within it.
During muscle contraction, veins carrying blood 
from the muscle to the heart get compressed,  
whereas arteries continue to deliver 
blood to the muscle from the heart,  
fundamentally producing a build-up of plasma 
within and around muscle fibers, evoking the pump.
Moreover, the build-up of metabolites as a result 
of chemical reactions within muscle fibers, like  
lactate, can draw additional fluid into the muscle 
fiber, thereby further intensifying the pump.
An optimal pump can be accomplished by ensuring 
muscle activation is high enough to meaningfully  
compress the veins carrying blood from the muscle 
to the heart, and ensuring that you're performing  
numerous or long-lasting contractions with 
minimal rest to enable more fluid accumulation.
However, is optimally evoking a pump even 
necessary for maximizing hypertrophy?
Let's find out.
Firstly, muscle fiber swelling (that is,  
the enlargement of a muscle fiber due to 
fluid accumulation, which occurs during  
the pump) has been mechanistically 
associated with muscle fiber growth.
More precisely,  
osmosensors within muscle fibers can detect 
the build-up of fluid that produces swelling.  
Such swelling may be considered a threat to the 
integrity of the fiber, thus initiating anabolic  
and anticatabolic pathways that ultimately 
hypertrophy the muscle fiber for reinforcement.
Indeed, some areas of the literature 
may potentially be used as evidence  
to suggest a greater pump means more hypertrophy.
A drop set involves performing repetitions 
to failure with a given load and then  
immediately reducing the load (typically 
by 15-25%) and performing repetitions to  
failure again. Generally, one to three 
load reductions are done. Moreover,  
multiple drop sets for a given exercise can 
be performed with rest intervals between them.
Due to the numerous bouts of repetitions 
to failure performed back to back,  
fluid accumulation is going to be much 
greater compared to performing normal  
sets that have you rest between repetition bouts.
As detailed in our drop set video, 
with isolation exercises at least,  
some evidence suggests drop sets 
might confer greater hypertrophy.
More precisely, Varovic et al. 
compared how performing 2-5 drop  
sets per session on the leg extension, 
interspersed with 120 seconds of rest,  
with each drop consisting of repetitions 
to failure with 2 load reductions  
compared to performing 2-5 sets of repetitions to 
failure on the leg extension, with 120 seconds of  
rest between sets. It was found quadriceps growth 
was overall greater with the drop set training.
Fink et al. compared a drop set consisting of 
repetitions to failure with 3 load reductions  
to performing 3 sets of repetitions 
to failure on the triceps pushdown.  
It was found triceps hypertrophy 
was greater with drop set training.
Consequently, although neither study directly 
examined it, it's possible the greater  
pumps achieved with drop set training 
could explain the greater hypertrophy.
Using shorter rest intervals between normal 
sets would also evoke a greater pump,  
as the lessened rest heightens 
the factors that drive the pump.
As examined in our rest 
interval ultimate guide video,  
the research on the optimal rest interval duration 
with isolation exercises isn't crystal clear.
But, one study by Fink et al. found when 
performing sets on three triceps and  
three biceps isolation exercises per session, 
resting for 30 seconds between sets produced  
greater arm cross-sectional area increases 
compared to resting 3 minutes between sets.
It's plausible the greater pump with short rest 
intervals could be the cause of more hypertrophy.
Using a constant tension technique, which is 
where you avoid locking out the joints involved  
in an exercise during your repetitions, due to 
forbidding intermittent muscle relaxation between  
repetitions, would sustain higher compression of 
veins and probably higher metabolite accumulation  
versus performing repetitions where 
you more or less lock the joints out.
One study by Goto et al. compared partial 
range of motion skull crushers that kept  
a constant tension on the triceps to 
full range of motion skullcrushers.  
Triceps cross-sectional area gains were greater 
with the constant tension skullcrushers.  
Perhaps the greater pump with a constant 
tension explains these findings.
Finally, one study by Hirono et al. actually found 
a correlation between the pump and hypertrophy.
Subjects trained leg extensions with 3 sets 
of 8 repetitions with an 80% one-rep max load,  
using 60 seconds of rest between 
sets, 3 times per week for 6 weeks.
During the first session, immediately, 5 
minutes, 10 minutes, and 15 minutes after it,  
quadriceps thickness was measured. This was 
considered a measure of muscle swelling.
3 to 7 days after the final training session on 
the 6th week, muscle thickness was also measured,  
but this measure was considered 
an indicator of hypertrophy.
Ultimately, the researchers found 
correlations between the magnitude  
of muscle swelling measured at all 
time points after the first training  
session and the amount of hypertrophy 
experienced by the end of the study.
Put another way, the subjects that saw 
the greatest pump of their quadriceps  
after the first session, ultimately seemed to 
experience the greatest quadriceps hypertrophy.
Although, it's worth pointing out the correlations 
were not super strong. The Spearman coefficient  
ranged from 0.4-0.6. 1 is what would indicate 
a perfect positive linear relationship.
So, some areas of the drop set, rest interval,  
and constant tension literature, as well as 
a correlational study potentially suggest  
training in a way that produces a 
greater pump evokes more hypertrophy.
However, are there other areas of the 
literature that go against this conclusion?
There are. Let us assess this data 
and then come to some conclusions.
Jenkins et al. had subjects, on different 
days, perform 3 sets of repetitions to  
failure with either a 30% one-rep max load 
or 80% one-rep max load, and immediately  
measured quadriceps cross-sectional area 
after (as an indicator of muscle swelling).
Quadriceps cross-sectional was greater 
after using a 30% one-rep max load.
This makes sense, when training to or 
close to failure, using lighter loads  
requires you to perform a higher number of 
repetitions compared to using heavier loads.  
Higher repetitions produce longer vein compression 
and subsequently higher fluid accumulation.  
Higher repetitions also likely permit 
higher metabolite accumulation.
Here's the thing, however, there's a 
substantial number of studies indicating  
when repetitions are performed to 
or near failure, training with 30%  
one-rep max loads produces similar muscle 
hypertrophy to 80% one-rep max loads,  
suggesting that the greater pump achieved with 
lighter loads does not mean more hypertrophy.
Moving on, even though we've established 
some areas of the rest interval and constant  
tension literature potentially indicating the 
greater the pump the more muscle hypertrophy,  
other areas of these two sets of 
the literature suggest otherwise.
Exploring the rest of interval literature first,  
and as thoroughly examined in our 
rest interval ultimate guide video,  
a few studies demonstrate with compound exercises 
and all other variables constant, resting  
2.5 minutes or more between sets produces more 
hypertrophy than resting for 90 seconds or less.
As it's more than likely resting for 2.5 or more  
minutes between sets evokes a lower pump 
compared to resting 90 seconds or less,  
this data indicates the pump may not 
be tightly associated with hypertrophy.
As for the constant tension literature, 
despite the aforementioned Goto et al. study,  
a different study by Pinto et al. compared 
partial range of motion preacher curls that  
kept constant tension on the biceps 
to full range of motion preacher curls  
and found no statistically significant differences 
in biceps thickness gains between the two.
Two studies by Tanimoto et al., with a 
range of exercises, compared how using a  
constant tension technique compared to simply 
locking out the involved joints. Increases  
in thickness gains of various muscles were not 
statistically different between the two methods.
Consequently, these three studies fail to 
support the notion that a constant tension  
(and thus a greater pump) 
produces more hypertrophy.
The final area of the literature worth 
sharing that questions the pump's strong  
association with hypertrophy is the 
blood flow restriction literature.
Blood flow restriction training is where some 
form of pressure (typically via a tourniquet  
cuff) is applied to the upper arms or legs 
during an exercise. When correctly done,  
this partially constricts the arteries 
carrying blood from the heart to the muscle,  
but completely constricts the veins 
carrying blood from the muscle to the heart.
Blood flow restriction is likely best 
used when performing repetitions to or  
close to failure with loads 
at or below 50% one-rep max.
The numerous repetitions required to achieve 
or near failure with these light loads,  
as well as the complete compressions of veins 
via the pressure, would evoke a great pump.
This type of blood flow restriction 
training, when compared to non-blood  
flow restriction with heavier loads (and thus 
fewer repetitions), produces a much greater pump.
Yet, a meta-analysis by Lixandrao et al. 
found blood flow restriction training  
with loads between 20-40% one-rep 
max ultimately produces similar  
hypertrophy to non-blood flow restriction 
training with 70-90% one-rep max loads.
Consequently, this data indicates a greater 
pump does not necessarily mean more hypertrophy.
Summarizing the current literature, 
although some areas may lead one to believe  
a greater pump means more hypertrophy, 
numerous other areas suggest otherwise.
As such, I think it's fair to 
say achieving a greater pump  
more than likely does not mean you'll 
experience more muscle hypertrophy.
Now, this does not necessarily mean 
the pump plays no role in hypertrophy.
Just because more of something (the pump in this 
case) does not produce more of another thing  
(hypertrophy in this case), we cannot definitively 
conclude there is no causation at all.
It’s possible some small degree 
of the events associated with a  
pump can be directly causative of 
some small amounts of hypertrophy.  
After all, recall there are mechanisms by 
which cell swelling could cause hypertrophy.
But even so, it's clear an individual need  
not train in a way that maximizes 
the pump to maximize hypertrophy.
But, I still feel there are other 
areas where the pump can be useful.
For one, remember that high muscle activation 
is one prerequisite for achieving a great pump,  
as it meaningfully compresses veins. Thus,  
the pump can be considered a solid indicator 
of what muscle/muscle regions you're training.
For example, let's say you're performing pull-ups,  
but you tend to significantly 
round your shoulders near the top.  
After altering this such that you maintain a 
more retracted shoulder position at the top,  
you notice a greater pump in your upper back and 
perhaps lats. In this scenario, I think it's not  
unreasonable to assume this change of technique 
probably resulted in you better recruiting the  
upper back and lats, which is a good thing if 
that's what you'd like to do with pull-ups.
Finally, the pump can be a very 
enjoyable part of training.  
I'll leave you with the 
everlasting words of Arnold