Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I want to answer the question
of whether expired protein powder is still
okay to use and if it’s fine to consume
the product even after the date listed on
the tub has passed.
Well, as with most bodybuilding and fitness
questions, there is no single black and white
answer that will apply in every situation.
So rather than giving one definite guideline
here, I’ll just go over some of the main
points that you're going to want to consider.
So first off, before doing anything, you’ll
obviously want to examine the powder firsthand
to look for any obvious signs that it’s
gone bad.
So if it contains any clumps due to moisture
getting inside, if it's discolored in any
way or if it smells or tastes slightly off,
then you’ll definitely want to get rid of
it and just purchase a new tub instead.
Now assuming that the powder looks, smells
and tastes fine, the next thing to consider
is where it’s been stored and whether or
not the tub is still sealed.
If the protein powder is still sealed and
if it's been stored in a cool, dry environment,
then it should be perfectly fine to consume
for quite a long period after the expiration
date has passed.
6-18 months past the date will almost certainly
be okay in most cases, again, as long as you
know for sure that it’s been stored properly,
and technically speaking it might be good
for even several years after the expiration
date.
However, there are no guarantees here, and
whether or not you want to consume a protein
powder that is 2 years or more past the listed
expiration date or just purchase a new tub
is up to you.
Now, if the protein powder has been opened
and if it was previously already used around
the time when it was first purchased, then
you're dealing with a different situation,
and in this case, there’s already been a
chance for moisture and bacteria to get inside
the tub and to multiply, and this becomes
a particular issue for concern if the protein
has been stored in a warm place for any reasonable
length of time.
So, if the expired protein powder has already
been previously opened, then I would recommend
that you be a lot more cautious with it and
I personally wouldn’t consume it any more
than probably about 6 months past the expiration
date.
Again though, do keep in mind that these are
just overall guidelines and it is possible
that it might still be perfectly okay.
There’s no way to know for sure, however,
I would personally much rather err on the
side of caution and simply purchase a fresh
tub in this situation.
The final factor to consider is whether you’re
dealing with a pure protein powder (like for
example, whey or casein) or a product that
has additional carbohydrates and fats mixed
in, such as a meal replacement powder or a
weight gainer powder.
If the expired protein powder contains additional
fat that has been added in, then you’ll
also want to be more cautious in this situation
since the fat will eventually go rancid just
like it would in any other food product.
So, if it’s an expired meal replacement
powder or an expired weight gainer powder
that contains added fats, then I wouldn’t
consume it any more than probably a few months
past the expiration date.
Keep in mind once again though that the guidelines
given in this video are just general overall
recommendations to go by, and there really
is no way for you to know for certain whether
a particular tub of protein powder is safe
to consume or not.
So my suggestion is that if you do find an
expired tub of protein that you aren’t sure
about, examine it firsthand, take the points
in this video into consideration, weigh it
off against the cost of just buying a new
tub altogether, and then make the decision
for yourself.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn some more information
on proper muscle building and fat loss supplementation,
as well as how to structure an optimal training
and nutrition plan suited to your individual
goals, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System using the icon at the
top of the video or by clicking the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.