So if you are still in the beginning stages
of this whole fitness thing.
Whether you are a guy or a girl.
Whether you’re thin and you’re trying
to gain muscle or whether you’re overweight
and you’re wanting to lean down.
Always remember that the people who you look
up to in this area, the guys or the girls
with that really fit body that you want to
achieve, don’t lose sight of the fact that
all those people started out in the same position
that you’re in.
You might look now at the finished product,
maybe someone who really muscular, lean, strong
and you might think that it seems unattainable
or it seems out of reach for you, but the
reality is that guy or girl doesn’t possess
anything special that you don’t.
They’re just another person just like you
who had a goal, follow the process and got
the result.
They started out as complete beginner at one
point, probably were out of shape, knew absolutely
nothing about how to build muscle or lose
fat.
And also looked up to other fitness people
in the same way that you’re doing right
now.
So don’t billed these people up and think
that they’re special in some way, or they’re
in the class that you can’t get to.
Because you’re literally just a version
of what they were at one point in time.
Yeah, obviously genetics do play a factor
here but unless you’re on the extreme end
of it, anyone can get an awesome physique
with enough time and enough patience.
Speaking for myself, I remember what it was
like before I started working out.
I was a skinny kid.
I was insecure about it.
I had no clue where to start.
I knew absolutely nothing.
I didn’t know what a compound exercise was.
I didn’t know what whey protein was.
I had no concept of calories, protein, or
carbs.
No clue what a proper nutrition or workout
plan looked like.
I actually remember printing of little exercise
tutorials and then being in my basement with
my little plastic weight set trying to follow
the instructions.
And then I remember my brother’s friends
coming over and actually making fun of me
for trying.
Now I don’t really have a good “before”
picture because I did start out pretty young
and I wasn’t running around taking shirtless
pictures, but you kind of get the idea here.
I was a naturally thin kid and I do remember
what my mindset was like back then, I really
hated it.
I remember looking at guys that were in shape
and just thinking that they were on some whole
other level which, of course, turned out to
be completely imaginary.
Now why am I saying all this?
The reason why I’m saying this is because
aside from having the basic desire to do something
in the first place, the number one thing that’s
going to allow you to really get started and
really commit and ultimately follow through
with this and get that physique that you want
is when you truly believe in advance that
you’re going to succeed.
When you really see the possibility as 100%
real and you know, not think, but you absolutely
know for sure that if you just follow the
process that you will get what it is that
you’re after.
Most people are not lazy, they just need the
strong incentive to put in the work.
And if you feel kind of uncertain in your
head because you’re looking at all these
other people who are in really great shape
and you think they’re somehow special or
that they’re different from you, you’re
not going to feel that certainty of outcome.
And even you might started and stick with
it for a little bit, you’re eventually going
to lose motivation.
So you have to understand that following the
process, the proper training, the proper nutrition,
following that is a literal guarantee that
you will succeed.
You can’t not succeed if you just follow
the steps.
The steps is not complicated.
Anybody can do it I promise you that.
If you go to the gym and you putting your
workouts and you follow a decently structured
nutrition plan and you just stick with it,
you actually can’t fail.
You’ve already won.
The result is already there.
You just have to follow the steps.
Every single person who is in shape follow
that process to get where they are now and
all you have to do is follow the same thing,
and you’ll get the same result.
So bottom line guys, the guys or girls out
there that are in shape, that have the body
that you aspire to have they’re not special.
They’re not unique.
They don’t have some magical talent that
you don’t have.
They are literally you in the future if you
just take the time and follow the process.
So this is me telling you that it’s not,
“If I put in the work, I might reach my
goal”, it’s, “If I put in the work,
if I truly put in the work, I will reach my
goal.
I will get that result”.
When it comes to fitness the results are honestly
a foregone conclusion.
It’s not that hard and once you get going
and you start seeing results, it really just
gets easier and easier.
So either you just do it or you don’t.
So thanks for watching guys, I hope you found
this helpful.
If you do want to remove all the [inaudible]
and get exact step-by-step plan, the workouts,
the meal plans, the supplements, everything
you need to get the results, so that you can
just follow it and get to your goals without
having to think about it too much, you can
visit www.BodyTransformationTruth.com and
download my Body Transformation Blueprint.
You can click here or the link is in the description
box below.
You can follow me on social media.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
don’t forget to comment, share, like, subscribe
all that good stuff and I’ll see you in
the next video.
See you.