Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here,
with another muscle in minutes Q&A, where
I answer your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less, so today's question
is on the issue of glutamine supplement and
whether or not it's a worthwhile supplement
to include in your bodybuilding program?
So, I did do a detailed video on this a few
months back, which I'll link up in the corner
here.
But I will also cover that here in a more
concise and to-the-point Q&A.
So, very quickly, is glutamine worth your
money?
There's three major claims you're going to
hear on the issue of glutamine supplementation.
The first is that it increases protein synthesis.
The second is that it helps to replenish post-workout
glycogen levels.
And the third is that it helps to increase
growth hormone secretion.
So, let's go through each one really quick.
On the issue of protein synthesis, glutamine
has been shown to increase protein synthesis,
but only in those suffering from clinical
stress and not from exercise-induced stress.
These are two very, very different things.
And there is no data currently available that
shows that glutamine increases proteins synthesis
in otherwise healthy athletes.
Secondly is on the issue of glycogen replenishment.
Even an exhausted weight training workout
is only going to drain glycogen by around
30%.
Even then, there's no need to immediately
replenish those levels unless you are training
the same muscle groups again on the same day.
You're going to finish your workout, you're
going to go home, you're going to have a post-workout
meal with some carbs in it, probably a few
other meals before you do your next training
session.
And those glycogen levels are going to naturally
replenish themselves anyway.
And there's really no need for a supplement
that's going to aid you in that process, because
you're nutrition will take care of it anyway.
And finally is the issue of growth hormone
secretion.
There's a huge difference between a substance
that boosts growth hormone and a substance
that boosts growth hormone to a level that
is going to favorably affect body composition
or performance.
In order to favorably affect those variables,
you need to boost growth hormone levels by
a very, very high percentage.
And there is no data showing that glutamine
can accomplish this.
So, that's also not worth worrying about.
So, is glutamine worth including in your program?
For the average bodybuilding, no.
It's going to be a waste of money.
All of the claims made about glutamine, can't
be backed up by any solid research.
And I will recommend that you stick to proven
supplements with reliable track records and
forget about L-Glutamine.
So, that's that question answered.
I hope you found this information useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
all of our future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description box for that.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for daily articles, videos, tips and muscle
building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.