Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
in today’s video I want to go over the benefits
and the proper form for the standing cable
pullover which is a really great exercise
when it comes to isolating your lats.
Now pullovers aren't something that you generally
see being performed at the gym very often
these days but they’re actually one of the
oldest bodybuilding movements in the book
and they actually used to be referred to as
the “upper body squat” back in like the
50’s and 60’s because a lot of lifters
considered them to be the best overall upper
body lift out there.
Now I definitely wouldn’t consider pullovers
to be the very BEST upper exercise available
but they definitely are a great movement for
the lats and they work really well as a finishing
movement to round out your overall lat workout.
Now most lifters (especially beginners) tend
to have a really hard time really feeling
it in their lats and activating the muscles
effectively when using standard vertical and
horizontal pulling movements, because other
muscles tend to take over, such as the biceps
and the shoulders and the other muscles of
the mid back, and pullovers help you to directly
isolate your lats through a large range of
motion and with minimal involvement of those
other muscle groups.
So the traditional way that pullovers are
usually performed is by laying perpendicular
across a bench and then using a single dumbbell.
Now this is still a good exercise but the
problem with dumbbell pullovers is that they
don’t give you consistent tension on your
lats throughout the entire range of motion
and that's because of the straight-up-and-down
direction that gravity is pulling the resistance.
So what happens is that your lats end up being
hit really hard in the first half of the range,
but as you pull the dumbbell further and further
toward your chest, the stress decreases until
there’s pretty much little to no tension
at all on your lats in the finishing position.
So actually the best way to perform this exercise
is by using a pullover machine because it
gives you the fullest range of motion possible
and it also keeps full tension on your lats
from the very bottom of the movement all the
way up to the top.
So if your gym happens to have a pullover
machine available then I would suggest using
that, however, most gyms don’t have them
available, and in that case, I’d recommend
that you perform the standing cable pullover
variation instead.
So here is the proper form for those.
So you’re going to place a straight-bar
or an EZ-curl bar attachment as high up on
a cable stand as possible and then you're
going to grab the attachment using an overhand
grip, with your hands spaced about shoulder-width
apart, and keeping roughly a 30 degree bend
in your elbows.
You want to have a good solid stance with
your feet spaced about shoulder width apart,
either directly side by side or with one foot
slightly in front of the other.
Keep your lower back slightly arched, keep
your chest puffed out and your torso leaning
forward, and then you're just going to pull
the cable attachment down in a circular movement
until your arms are at your sides and you
feel a good strong contraction in your lats.
Focus on driving the resistance down using
your elbows rather than your hands because
that will help you to maximize lat activation.
And from there just raise the bar back up
under control until it is directly overhead
and your lats are nice and stretched out,
before pulling the weight back down again.
Now keep in mind that because everybody has
a different body structure and varying shoulder
flexibility, the exact distance that you stand
from the machine and the range of motion that
you use will vary a bit from person to person
so you’re going to need to experiment with
the movement to just find the position for
yourself that allows you to hit your lats
as effectively as possible and that also feels
most comfortable on your shoulders and your
elbows.
My suggestion is to perform these as a finishing
movement at the end of your lat workout after
all of your compound vertical and horizontal
pulling movements have been completed, you
can do them for 3-4 sets for anywhere from
8-12 controlled reps.
These are a fairly uncommon exercise, but
standing cable pullovers allow you to hit
your lats using a different angle than traditional
pull ups, pulldowns and rows and they’re
a great way to round out your workout for
maximum lat stimulation and growth.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more simple but highly effective training
tips to maximize your muscle building and
your fat burning progress, along with science-based
nutrition and supplementation information,
make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.