Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com.
I just wanted to post this one today as sort
of a “quick tip” video, I might start
throwing these in here and there along with
the more comprehensive videos that I do, but
today’s tip is basically this: if you have
made the decision to start a bulking phase
and you’re committed to putting on a decent
amount of muscle, always make sure to structure
your diet cautiously and conservatively at
the start.
Meaning, don’t make any sudden, dramatic
increases in your total calorie intake right
off the bat, but instead always start off
slowly and gradually taper your calories up
until you land in the proper muscle building
range for yourself.
The reason being that any time you try to
put on a significant amount of muscle, you’re
always going to gain some body fat along with
it as well, and, fat gain is basically a one
way street.
Meaning, if you’re in a bulking phase, whatever
fat you happen to gain during that cycle is
going to stay with you and it isn't going
anywhere until you decide to go in the opposite
direction and cut – because remember, for
most people, building muscle and losing fat
at the same time to any significant degree
just isn’t going to be realistic.
So if you do what a lot of guys do and just
decide, you know, my goal is to gain muscle
so I’m just going to start eating a ton
of food every day without really tracking
anything, I just need to “eat big to get
big”, and you end up putting on an excessive
amount of fat in a relatively short period
of time at the start, it’s really just going
to end up throwing your entire bulking phase
off track both physically and mentally.
Physically because you’ll obviously be carrying
more body fat than you’d like and you probably
won’t be happy with how you look, and mentally
because you’ll know that, again, fat gain
is a one way street and if you want to keep
gaining muscle then you’re actually going
to end up gaining even more body fat as you
move forward.
And I see this all the time where guys basically
yo-yo back and forth – they try to bulk
but they do it too aggressively so they get
too fat, they switch back to a cutting phase
but since they haven’t really gained a lot
of muscle in the first place since they didn’t
bulk for long enough, they really just end
up spinning their wheels and not making any
real meanginful progress.
Remember, your body can only build a limited
amount of muscle in any given day anyway,
so cramming your face with more and more food
really isn’t helping the process, and you’ll
be much better off to just maintain a small
to moderate calorie surplus and focus on making
lean muscle gains while keeping body fat gains
to a minimum.
So, again, start off slowly.
Find your calorie maintenance level which
is the number of calories that you require
each day to maintain your current weight,
and there are a lot of possible calculations
that you can use to do this and keep in mind
that they’re really all just rough estimates
because you really can’t know for sure since
everyone has a different physical makeup and
different activity level, but if you want
the most basic and just the simplest way to
do this, then just multiply your body weight
by between 14-16 and go higher or lower depending
on your activity level, and from there, just
increase it by a small amount, maybe 200 to
250 calories at the start.
From there, track your changes in body weight,
see how it affects you and then gradually
increase your calories until you’re gaining
somewhere around half a pound up to maybe
1 pound of total body weight per week maximum
depending on you experience level, this is
generally a good guideline for most people
to go by.
Taking the slow and steady approach will still
allow you to gain muscle at or near your maximum
potential anyway, but it will also keep fat
gains under control, and it’s just a much
better long term approach for gaining muscle
and preventing that counterproductive “yo
yo” approach that ends up throwing so many
lifters off track.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found the information useful here today,
make sure to like, comment and subscribe if
you found the information helpful, you can
also get instant access to my complete Body
Transformation Blueprint System by clicking
the icon at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below, and
make sure to check out my official blog over
at SeanNal.com to stay up to date on all of
my latest content.
Talk to you again soon.