Hey, what's up guys?
This is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com,
with another bodybuilding video lesson for
you.
And in today's lesson, I want to talk a little
bit about weight gain powders.
Now, these are a popular supplement for naturally
thin guys who are looking to build overall
muscle mass and basically bulk up.
And what they basically are is a high calorie
mix of protein, carbs and fats in powdered
form that makes it easier for you to meet
your overall muscle building nutrition needs.
Now, this kind of powders can come in handy
in two situations.
A, for people who have a busy schedule, and
need the convenience of a meal in shake form,
or secondly, for guys who have higher calorie
needs, but maybe don't have a large appetite
for whole foods.
But are weight gain powders a good supplement
to include in your muscle building diet?
And if so, what is the best weight gainer
available?
Well, the first thing you need to keep in
mind is that any calories that you consume
beyond your maximum muscle building needs
for the day are simply going to be stored
as fat.
Your body can only synthesize a limited amount
of muscle tissue in a given day.
And if you go too far beyond what you need
to stimulate growth for that particular day,
it's just going to end up on your waist line
rather than as new muscle mass.
So yes, you do need a calorie surplus of about
15% to 20% above maintenance in order to support
muscle recovery and growth.
But going too far beyond that, it's just going
to work against you.
And secondly, you need to realize that most
weight gain powders are actually a very simple
mix.
Usually all they are is whey protein mixed
with maltodextrin.
Now, whey protein is great.
It's the best muscle building protein source
you can put in your body.
But maltodextrin on the other hand is really
nothing more than a basic processed sugar.
And most weight gain powders are generally
going to contain somewhere around 70, 80,
90, 100grams or more of maltodextrin per serving.
Now, if this is consumed in limited amounts
and part of your overall macronutrient chart
-- totals, in other words if you're -- if
you're taking into account exactly what you're
consuming, then it's not bad, as long as it's
only making up a small portion of your overall
diet.
But, the thing that you need to realize is
that, a mix that's only containing whey protein
and maltodextrin is going to be very low in
fiber, it's going to be low in micronutrients.
And these weight gain shakes are also going
to be low in healthy fats as well.
So, yes, you can include these weight gain
powders if it only makes up a small portion
of your diet, and if you are tracking the
protein, carb and fat totals.
However, a much better option is simply this;
and that is to just buy whey protein on its
own, and then mixing your own carbs and fats
at home.
What this is going to do is it's going to
give you the high quality protein, but it's
also going to give you the high quality carbs
that are going to have the high fiber, the
high micronutrient, and you can mix in some
healthy fats as well.
So, there's literally an endless number of
different homemade weight gain shakes that
you could consume if you just, you know, search
Google or whatever, I'm sure you'll find tons
of recipes.
But today, I want to share with you one of
my favorites.
And this is one that I've been using for probably
four or five years.
It's very simple.
It only takes maybe two or three minutes to
make, and it's going to provide you with a
good quality mix of protein, carbs and fats
to support muscle recovery and growth.
So, I'll put that recipe up on the screen.
Now, you can just pause the video and copy
it down.
And I'll also post the macronutrient breakdown
as well.
So, as you can see, this is a very simple
and straightforward recipe.
And an 804calories, it's going to make hitting
your overall macronutrient needs a much easier
task.
And it's going to help you get those macronutrients
from high quality sources.
Also keep in mind that that recipe that I
just showed you there, it's not set in stone,
you know, if you want to go even higher calorie,
you can add in fruit, you can add in nuts,
flaxseed oil, you can add in yogurt, you can
even add ice cream if you want it.
So, again, you can play around with it and
see -- see what you like best or alternative,
if you want to go a little bit lower calorie,
you can just decrease the serving size.
If you do want a really high quality whey
protein powder to use as the protein source
for your weight gain shakes or for any other
protein shake that you're making, I highly
recommend checking out IsoM3 whey protein
over on EliteImpactLabs.com, and some of the
highest quality protein you're going to find
anywhere, and I'll put the link in the description
box for that.
So, I hope you found this video lesson useful.
To get your free 28-day mass building plan,
that includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement plan, just click the link in
the description box to download that from
EliteImpactLabs.com.
Also make sure to subscribe if you haven't
already to stay up-to-date on all of our future
videos.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night.
Thanks again, for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.