When training to build strength or muscle,
most people use a sets and reps structure.
For instance, you may perform 3 sets of 6
reps on the bench press in a session.
However, something called the 3/7 method seems
to be gaining some degree of popularity in
recent years.
This method appears to have originated from
a 2005 French Fitness book.
The 3/7 method has you select a 70% one-rep
max load (which equates to a load you can
generally perform a maximum of 12 repetitions
with).
With this 70% one-rep max load, you perform
3 reps, rest for 15 seconds, perform 4 reps,
rest for 15 seconds, perform 5 reps, rest
for 15 seconds, perform 6 reps, rest for 15
seconds, and then perform a final 7 reps.
Generally, the first 3 and 4 rep sets are
quite easy.
But, the 5, 6 and 7 rep sets are pretty much
near or to failure.
Could doing this be superior for muscle or
strength gain?
Let us examine the evidence.
A study by Stragier et al. had 43 previously
untrained men train a machine biceps exercise
twice per week for 8 weeks.
A normal group, each session, performed the
exercise with 8 sets of 6 repetitions with
a 70% one-rep max load, using 2.5 minutes
of rest between sets.
A 3/7 group, each session, with a 70% one-rep
max load, performed the 3/7 method for 2 bouts,
separated by 2.5 minutes of rest between bouts.
Just to emphasize this, they repeated the
3/7 method twice in a session, with a 2.5-minute
rest interval between them.
For both groups, if a subject was unable to
complete their respective prescribed protocol,
assistance was provided.
On the other hand, if a subject could complete
their respective prescribed protocol for two
sessions in a row, they increased the load
they used by 2.5-5%.
After the 8 weeks of training, increases in
one-rep max on the machine biceps exercise
were greater for the 3/7 group.
Furthermore, increases in biceps long head
thickness (which was averaged out from an
upper, middle, and lower region) were also
greater for the 3/7 group.
Before exploring these hypertrophy results
further, I think it's first worth looking
at the strength results a little further.
Despite the study finding greater increases
in one-rep max with the 3/7 method, the results
do not necessarily suggest the 3/7 method
is optimal for strength gains.
Remember, 2 bouts of the 3/7 method were compared
to 8 sets of 6 reps with a 70% one-rep max
load.
For maximizing your one-rep max on an exercise,
training with heavier loads is likely better.
For example, Schoenfeld et al. found training
sets on the bench press and back squat with
2-4 reps with a roughly 90% one-rep max load
produced greater one-rep max gains on the
bench press and back squat compared to training
them with 8-12 reps with a roughly 75% one-rep
max load.
Therefore, if the 3/7 method was compared
to training with 90%+ one-rep max loads, I
think it's highly likely the 3/7 method would
be inferior.
Let us now dive into the hypertrophy results.
As we noted, the 3/7 group experienced more
gains than the normal group.
However, some of you may be questioning the
normal group's training program.
8 sets of 6 repetitions with a 70% one-rep
max load sounds a little odd and doesn't really
sound like something you would do to build
muscle.
Perhaps if the 3/7 method was compared to
a more traditional hypertrophy protocol, say
3 to 5 sets of 8-12 repetitions performed
to or near failure, the results would not
have been so favorable for the 3/7 group.
This was actually my initial thought when
I first read the study.
However, upon closer analysis, 8 sets of 6
reps with a 70% one-rep max load is probably
quite effective for building muscle, meaning
this may not be a problem.
Firstly, a 70% one-rep max load is perfectly
fine for building muscle, as we've explored
in previous rep range videos.
With a 70% one-rep max load, you can generally
perform around a maximum of 12 repetitions
to failure.
The normal group only performed 6 reps per
set, meaning their 1st set would have been
roughly 6 reps away from failure.
Now, due to the effects of cumulative fatigue,
the following sets would have been closer
to failure.
Let us assume that each successive set puts
a subject 1 rep closer to failure than the
previous set.
Of course, this is far from perfect.
But for our purposes, it will work.
When broken down in this way, it's hard to
call this protocol meaningfully suboptimal
for building muscle.
The reason I say this is because training
to failure does not appear to be neccessary
for hypertrophy.
A fair few papers demonstrate that training
3 to 1 rep away from failure per set is as
effective for hypertrophy to training to failure.
Out of the 8 sets for the normal group, 5
sets would likely have been within 3 reps
from failure.
Furthermore, as we'll explore in future videos,
there actually is some evidence training 5
reps away from failure could also be as effective
as training to failure for hypertrophy.
So, perhaps even more of the normal group's
sets could be classified as optimal for building
muscle.
On the basis of all of this, I think this
study probably did find the 3/7 method to
truly have some sort of enhanced benefit for
muscle hypertrophy.
Why could this be?
Could there be something special amount incrementally
performing more reps with a given load while
using short rest durations.
The authors of the study speculated the 3/7
method superiority could be explained by it
producing more metabolic stress.
Metabolic stress is the build-up of metabolites
(which are products of cellular processes)
such as lactate within muscles.
However, I'm skeptical of this simply because
the role of metabolic stress in muscle growth
is far from clear.
There are numerous cases in which more metabolic
stress does not result in more muscle hypertrophy.
All in all, I don't know if there are any
legitimate reasons as to why the 3/7 method
could build more muscle.
Moving on, it's essential to recognize this
is only a single study.
There are no other studies, as far as I'm
aware, exploring the effects of the 3/7 method
on muscle hypertrophy.
A single study is nothing near definitive
and conclusive evidence.
Because of this, we simply cannot be anywhere
close to certain that the 3/7 method truly
builds more muscle.
Furthermore, the study was conducted on previously
untrained individuals and so we do not know
if this study can be replicated in trained
individuals.
The closest thing I can think of to the 3/7
method is rest-pause training.
Rest-pause training involves performing reps
to failure with a given load, then resting
for 15 to 20 seconds, and performing further
repetitions to failure with that same load.
This can be repeated however many times you
wish.
Of course, the similarity to the 3/7 method
lies in the short rest between repetition
bouts.
Could the rest-pause training research provide
greater insight into the potential hypertrophic
effects of the 3/7 method?
By my count, there are only two studies that
have technically explored rest-pause training.
Enes et al. had 19 men with at least 2 years
of training experience perform the back squat,
leg press, and leg extension, twice per week
for 8 weeks.
A normal group trained each exercise per session
with 4 sets of 12 repetitions with a 70% one-rep
max load, using 2 minutes of rest between
sets.
A rest-pause group performed 10 repetitions
with a 75% one-rep max load, rested 20 seconds,
and then performed 6 further repetitions with
the same load.
For each exercise, they performed 3 of these
rest-pause sets, with 120 seconds of rest
between sets.
At the fifth week of training, both groups
increased their training loads by 5%.
By the end of the study, increases in lateral
thigh thickness (which includes the vastus
lateralis and vastus intermedius), at 30%,
50%, and 70% of the thigh bone length were
statistically similar between both groups,
suggesting rest-pause provides no muscle growth
benefit.
Having said this, the rest-pause group did
not take their repetitions to failure, and
only one extra bout of repetitions was performed
per set, so this is potentially a limitation.
Another study by Prestes et al. has 18 individuals
with at least 1 year of training experience
perform a range of exercises four times per
week for 6 weeks.
A normal group performed each exercise per
session with 3 sets of 6 reps with an 80%
one-rep max load, using 2-3 minutes of rest
between sets.
A rest-pause group, for each exercise per
session, performed reps to failure with an
80% one-rep max load, and then rested 20 seconds
before performing further reps to failure.
They did until they reached a total of 18
reps.
After the 6 training weeks, increases in chest
and arm thickness were similar between both
groups, but increases in quadriceps thickness
were greater for the rest-pause group.
So the results of this study partially suggest
rest-pause training can enhance muscle hypertrophy.
However, there is a limitation.
It seems the normal group did not apply progressive
overload.
Recall they were performing 3 sets of 6 reps
with an 80% one-rep max load.
In the early stages of the study, this likely
would have meant subjects were roughly 3 to
1 reps away from failure per set, which we
know is fine for muscle hypertrophy.
However, as they get stronger from these initial
training sessions, this 80% one-rep max load
would no longer have actually been their true
80% one-rep max, rather less.
Given no progressive overload was applied,
meaning they did not readjust their 80% one-rep
max load, they were probably training with
more than 3 reps away from failure per set
as the study progressed.
On the other hand, given the rest-pause group
was performing all their repetitions to failure,
progressive overload would naturally have
been applied.
Due to this limitation, this study should
be considered with caution.
So all in all, the rest-pause research seems
too limited and insufficient to provide us
with any further clues on the 3/7 method.
To conclude the video, a single study does
seem to suggest the 3/7 method can build more
muscle.
However, given it is only a single study,
we cannot be certain the 3/7 method truly
builds more muscle, hopefully future research
can provide us with more clarity.
Ultimately, there probably is no terrible
downside to experimenting with the 3/7 method
if that's something you'd think you like to
do.
One thing I've yet to mention is the 3/7 method
can be considered quite time-efficient.
By my calculations, in the stragier et al.
study, excluding the warm-up, the 3/7 group
would have been training for 5-6 minutes per
session, while the normal group would have
been training for 19-20 minutes each session.