That is beyond insane, it's honestly, one
of the goofiest claims I've ever seen someone
make.
What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, realscienceathletics.com.
And today I'm going to be reviewing a video
by Tim Ferriss outlining his two simple but
powerful tips that he claims will allow you
to lose between 10 to 20 pounds of pure body
fat every single month.
Not just body weight, he actually makes sure
to clarify that this is 10 to 20 pounds of
fat loss per month.
So obviously you don't want to miss out on
this one.
Before I jump into it, if you enjoy these
no BS fitness videos, and you want to stay
up to date on all of my future uploads, then
make sure to subscribe to the channel and
hit the little bell icon it to enable notifications,
and don't forget to sign up for your free
custom fitness program after this video is
done over at seannal.com/custom, just fill
out the form on that page and I'll personally
send you a free training nutrition and supplement
plan tailored to your individual needs so
that you can get the very best results possible
based on your goals and experience level,
you can click up here for that or use the
link in the description box below.
So a lot of you probably know who Tim Ferriss
is, he's a well known business/personal development
expert.
He's quite well known.
And he also gives out fitness advice and sells
books that teach people, or attempt to teach
people, how to build muscle and lose fat.
He's the author of a program called, The 4-Hour
Body, which is based on the claim, and this
is not a joke, I'll try to say this with a
straight face, based on the claim, wait for
it, that he gained 34 pounds of muscle in
28 days.
Yes, 34 pounds of muscle in 28 days, or 1.2
pounds of muscle per day.
No, this is not some parody of some crazy
insane '90s muscle magazine supplement ad,
he actually seriously claims this and sells
a program using that claim as advertising
material.
Even though, in reality, the absolute most
that a natural trainee could probably expect
to gain in a month of perfect training and
nutrition, would be around one to two pounds
of overall relatively lean body weight, three
pounds at the most.
And that's not pure muscle mass that also
takes into account the extra water weight
and the body fat gain as well.
And anything beyond about three pounds per
month is just going to be pure body fat, essentially.
Not only that, but he also claims to have
done this by training twice a week for 30
minutes per session.
So this whole transformation was done through
a total of four hours of training, and he
also claims to have lost four and a half percent
body fat at the same time.
Ridiculous.
That's really dumb.
Now keep in mind guys that 34 pounds of muscle
is roughly around the lifetime amount that
a natural lifter with a round average genetics
could expect to gain.
And it would probably take about three years,
give or take, in order to build the bulk of
that amount.
Even with the most advanced steroid cycle
known to man, taking in the highest possible
dose, right to the brink of killing yourself,
but not quite killing yourself, you still
would not even come close to gaining 34 pounds
of pure muscle mass in 28 days.
That is beyond insane, it's honestly, one
of the goofiest claims I've ever seen someone
make, even someone as out to lunch as Vince
Del Monte.
What's up champ, I'm Vince Del Monte.
Only dared to claim 41 pounds of muscle in
six months.
It's a very good example of why you need to
remain skeptical, no matter who you're listening
to, and be wary of something called the halo
effect, which is a cognitive bias, where having
a positive impression of someone in one area
then causes you to assume that the things
that they say in other areas are also true.
So maybe you follow Tim Ferriss for business
advice and you find that advice helpful, and
he has a large following, and he seems credible,
he's an author, which actually doesn't really
mean much in and of itself, but because of
those things, you then assume that his fitness
advice must automatically be accurate, which
as I just explained, and I'm about to explain
further, is definitely not the case.
So let's go over Tim Ferriss's two weight
loss tips, that aren't actually weight loss
tips.
There are two changes or things that I recommend
focusing on.
The first is breakfast, if you nail breakfast,
even if you don't change any of your other
meals, any other behaviors, that is often
enough to lose 10 to 20 pounds per month of
fat.
Okay, unless you're literally injecting human
growth hormone and Clenbuterol and whatever
other drugs people use for fat loss, directly
into your protein pancakes every morning,
you are absolutely not going to lose 10 pounds
of body fat per month just by altering what
you eat for breakfast, let alone 20 pounds,
which would be flat out physiologically impossible
unless Tim's breakfast tip is to not eat breakfast
and then not eat any other meals for the rest
of the day or the week or the entire month.
One pound of stored fat contains about 3,500
calories, and so to lose 10 to 20 pounds per
month, you'd need to create a net monthly
deficit of 35,000 to 70,000 calories, which
would equate to around a 1,200 to 2,400 calorie
deficit per day.
If someone was morbidly obese and they used
a very aggressive calorie deficit, then 10
pounds of fat would technically be possible,
though it would still be extremely hard to
achieve.
And it most definitely wouldn't occur just
by changing what they eat for breakfast.
And I've seen this thousands of times now.
Okay, anyone can just say they've seen something
thousands of times, but that doesn't mean
that it's true.
Tim Ferriss has also apparently seen himself
gain 34 pounds of muscle in 28 days, so I
don't know how much faith I'd be putting in
his anecdotal reports.
Maybe he knows of someone who lost 10 pounds
of body weight per month, that would be possible
in some cases, but it wasn't 10 pounds of
body fat, and there was probably a lot more
going on than just modifying their breakfast.
The dream breakfast I would say is going to
check two boxes.
Number one, you're going to have breakfast
within 30 minutes of waking up.
So you can think of it as 30, within 30.
30 grams of protein within 30 minutes of waking
up.
So there's no reason why you specifically
need to eat breakfast within 30 minutes of
waking up.
I'm not really sure why he gives that recommendation,
he doesn't give any specific reason, but do
keep in mind that there's nothing inherently
special about breakfast from a fat burning
or muscle building perspective.
It doesn't kickstart your metabolism for the
day, like a lot of experts claim, and there
are many people out there who are actually
able to achieve better fat loss results by
doing the opposite and skipping breakfast,
and then pushing their first meal until later
on in the day, for example, with intermittent
fasting.
Fat loss is ultimately a matter of maintaining
a net calorie deficit for the day as a whole,
and the specific way that you space your meals
out is really just a matter of personal preference
in terms of what helps you control your appetite
most effectively and just what you enjoy the
most in general.
If total calories are equated, then there
is no bottom line difference between eating
breakfast versus not eating breakfast and
it's not true that eating breakfast causes
everybody to automatically consume fewer calories
later on in the day.
Again, for many people out there, it's the
complete opposite.
And let me know in the comments, what approach
you personally utilize, and that helps you
stick to your nutrition plan as closely as
possible.
Do you eat a regular breakfast meal soon after
waking up or do you prefer to push your first
meal until a bit later on?
And if you're enjoying this video so far and
make sure to hit that like button below and
let me know, and I'll be sure to do more critique
videos in this same style.
And the meal that I would suggest is something
like two or three eggs, then you have lentils
or black beans and then some type of green
vegetable, like spinach.
Sure, there's nothing wrong with that type
of meal if you prefer it.
But there's also nothing special about eating
beans, eggs and vegetables for breakfast.
And it's not some fat loss secret that's going
to magically cause you to drop 10 to 20 pounds
of body fat per month.
And you get two things, you get protein, which
has a high thermic effect of food and will
inhibit your appetite somewhat for the rest
of the day.
So you might consume, say anywhere from 20
to 30% fewer calories than otherwise.
So this here is an example of making a statement
that's technically true, but then completely
overblowing the actual real world benefit.
Yes, protein does have the highest thermic
effect of the three major macronutrients,
and thermic effect is essentially the number
of calories that are lost as heat energy during
the digestion process.
You'll hear different estimates, but protein
is around 20 to 30% TEF, carbohydrates are
about 5 to 10%, and fats are the lowest at
anywhere from 1 to 3%.
So if you eat 30 grams of protein, as he recommends,
that's equal to 120 calories, meaning that
you're going to burn a whopping 25 to 35 calories
through TEF, from the protein in that meal,
which is basically nothing.
It's definitely important to consume sufficient
protein for the day as a whole, both for fat
burning and muscle building purposes.
It'll help you control your appetite and assist
with muscle recovery and growth.
About 0.8 grams per pound of body weight or
higher as a good figure to aim for, 0.7 grams
is probably enough if you're very overweight,
but there's nothing magical whatsoever about
eating 30 grams of protein in one isolated
meal.
You're also consuming a lot of fiber, which
is going to leave you feeling full, satiated
for many hours afterwards.
This is a really, really key component.
So yeah, that I agree with.
To lose fat successfully, you should be basing
the bulk of your diet around minimally processed,
higher fiber whole foods because they contain
less calories relative to their volume.
And will keep you feeling full for longer,
which then increases the chances that you'll
be able to maintain your calorie deficit for
the day.
But again, his tip here is based around breakfast
specifically and eating one high fiber meal
in isolation is not going to have some massive
spillover effect like he's claiming here.
Second piece is if you drink coffee, tea,
anything like that, instead of using milk
and trust me, I don't care if it's almond
milk or some other type of fancy milk that
you think isn't real milk, no.
Almost all of those are going to spike insulin
and glucose levels.
If you're literally going to say that putting
a small amount of milk into your coffee, that
that's going to then cause some massive surge
in insulin that will prevent you from losing
fat, then you should basically be terrified
of eating pretty much anything because any
normal carbohydrate containing meal is going
to produce an insulin response many times
greater than just a few splashes of milk in
your coffee, not to mention that carbs aren't
even the only thing that spike insulin.
Protein actually causes insulin to be released
as well.
This whole obsession with insulin is a complete
misallocation of most people's effort.
It technically is a storage hormone, but your
net gains or losses in body fat for the day
as a whole, are still going to be determined
by how many calories there are to be stored
in the first place.
As long as you're in an overall calorie deficit,
then insulin isn't even something you need
to be thinking about if you're otherwise healthy.
And there's even data now showing that as
long as total calories are equated, there
is no bottom line difference in fat loss between
low sugar versus high sugar diets.
Yes, it's true that you don't want to be drinking
a large percentage of your calories or eating
too many high sugar items because they're
not satiating and then you'll be more likely
to overeat for the day as a whole, but for
God's sake man, putting a bit of milk in your
coffee is the last thing you need to be worrying
about here.
This is looking at fat loss from such a narrow
lens rather than looking at the overall picture,
which is by far the most important thing.
Using a bunch of high sugar coffee creamer,
sure yeah you definitely want to be careful
with things like that because they're very
calorie dense and they can add up if you aren't
careful.
But adding a bit of a regular milk, that's
20 calories for three tablespoons, it's nothing
to be concerned about unless you're using
tons of it and you aren't tracking it at all.
And almond milk, which he also advises against
for some bizarre reason, that has about 10
calories for three tablespoons, assuming that
it's unsweetened and it has one to two grams
of carbs, so this whole insulin theory he
puts forward here makes zero sense in this
case.
And with that change alone, even if you don't
handle the breakfast piece, I've seen people
lose, yet again, 10, 15 pounds in a given
month.
Unless someone was drinking eight coffees
a day and pouring half a bottle of sugary
coffee creamer into every single one of them.
Then no, Tim Ferriss has not seen people lose
15 pounds of body fat per month, simply by
switching from putting regular milk in their
coffee to using full fat cream, without any
other changes.
And overarching that remember fat loss, 99%
diet.
You can't outwork your mouth.
I don't know if I'd say that fat loss is 99%
diet, but yeah, I would agree that nailing
your eating habits down is by far the most
important part of the process.
That is true.
However, these two weight loss tips that he
gives are basically just fluff.
They're not necessarily going to hurt you,
if you want to experiment with eating eggs,
beans, and vegetables for breakfast, that's
fine.
Maybe it's a meal that you enjoy at that time
of day, and it does keep you feeling fuller
for longer, if you want to put full fat cream
into your coffee instead of milk, that's fine,
as long as you're being mindful of the calorie
content, but there is nothing special about
this advice whatsoever and it absolutely is
not going to cause you to lose 10 to 20 pounds
of body fat per month, just like Tim Ferriss
did not gain 34 pounds of muscle in 28 days.
For most people, unless they're morbidly obese,
usually around one to two pounds of overall
body weight loss per week, that is going to
be a realistic rate to go by.
Most of it will be fat, but you'll also lose
some water weight and glycogen along with
it.
And usually if you try to go much faster than
that, then it means that your calorie deficit
is accessibly large to the point that you're
probably not going to be able to stick to
it longterm.
Keep in mind, once again, that fat loss is
about the big picture.
It's about creating a calorie deficit for
the day and for the week as a whole and setting
up your diet in a way so that you can maintain
that deficit as consistently as possible.
It's not about micromanaging these tiny little
details.
That's only going to overcomplicate things
for you without delivering any additional
real world benefit.
Maybe Tim Ferriss gives good business and
personal development advice, but based on
what I've seen from him, he is completely
missing the mark with his fat loss and muscle
building advice.
And again, halo effect guys, just because
someone has knowledge in one area and...
Speaks slowly and confidently to make it sound
like they really know what they are talking
about and that this is extremely important
information that you need to listen to...
That doesn't mean that they actually know
what they're talking about.
So thanks for watching.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to support the channel while maximizing the
effectiveness of your fitness program at the
same time, then make sure to check out my
sports nutrition company, RealScience Athletics,
which unlike most of the poorly formulated
junk out there in the industry nowadays, offers
100% evidence-based supplements you can trust
to optimize your muscle building and fat burning
results.
Just head over to realscienceathletics.com,
using the link at the top of the screen or
in the description box, and you can use coupon
code, YOUTUBE15, to save 15% off your entire
first order.
And as always guys make sure to hit that like
button, leave a comment and subscribe below
if you haven't already in order to stay up
to date on future videos.
Thanks again, and I will see you in the next
video.