Hey, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video today we’re talking about
intermittent fasting.
So it’s become a really popular way of eating
over the last few years.
A lot of people sort of hyped it up as being
some kind of magical dieting solution that
everyone should be using.
So today I want to give you the real facts
about what intermittent fasting is and what
it isn’t, so that you can decide for yourself
if it’s right for you.
So what intermittent fasting is; is that it’s
one option out of many different options when
it comes to laying out your calories and macros
for the day.
So we know that meal frequency is basically
a non issue when it comes to fat loss, so
in other words eating a larger meals less
frequently or smaller meals more frequently
that’s not going to affect your bottom line
rate of fat loss, and so the basic goal of
your fat loss diet should be to lay out your
daily meals in whatever you personally prefer
and in whatever way it feels best for you
individually in terms of managing your hunger,
maintaining you energy and focus, and sticking
to your diet over the longer term.
For a certain percentage of people fasting
for 16 hours and then eating two or three
larger meals within an eight hour window,
which is the most popular I.F.
method, for certain percentages of people
that is the most effective way of doing things.
A lot of people find that they get more physical
and mental satisfaction out of being able
to sit down and enjoy those larger meals,
and they also might find that there’s less
margin for error because they’re not eating
all throughout the day and so it was easier
to not overboard on calories.
So for a lot of people it’s just a good
way of simplifying things and hitting their
daily calories more easily.
But that’s really all intermittent fasting
is, again it’s one possible option, one
possible way of laying out your daily meals
and it’s a way that a certain percentage
of the population will prefer.
Now, what intermittent fasting isn’t; is
some sort of fail-proof way of eating that
every single dieter will do better on and
on top of that it doesn’t have any special
fat burning effects in comparison to eating
more frequently throughout the day.
In other words, assuming that your calories
and your macros are the same it’s not going
to make any difference in terms of bottom
line fat loss.
Someone eating 2,000 calories on an intermittent
fasting diet will ultimately lose fat at the
same rate as someone eating 2,000 calories
on six meals a day.
There actually is some data on this that I’ll
link in the description box below, which looked
at 40 different studies comparing an intermittent
calorie deficit with a continuous calorie
deficit, and the conclusion was basically
that not only were the actual fiber-rating(?)
results the same but the number of people
who stuck with the diet versus how many dropped
out, that was also the same.
The reason why a lot of people swear by the
intermittent fasting and say that they got
better results with it, isn’t because I.F.
itself burn fat faster but instead it’s
because for a lot of people using the I.F.
structure helps them stay on point with their
daily calorie targets more effectively, which
is a huge issue because most average dieters
will tend to under-report their calorie intake
by a pretty big margin.
So they lose fat faster simply because of
better accuracy and better overall adherence,
and that’s something that they might have
been lacking when they were eating more frequent
meals.
As a final note, yes you will see plenty of
client testimonials from people who promoted
intermittent fasting, but you can very easily
find testimonials for pretty much any type
of diet and keep in mind that for every person
who reports, you know, great results with
intermittent fasting there’s also going
to be plenty people out here, who you never
hear from, who don’t get the results that
they’re after.
So it’s pretty easy to have those positive
testimonials take out but there’s probably
just as many people out there who tried intermittent
fasting and didn’t like it but you just
never hear from them.
So what’s the bottom line here?
If you’ve tried dieting on a traditional
structure of four to six meals spaced throughout
the day and you have a hard time sticking
with it or if you just want to give something
different a try then, yeah, intermittent fasting
is a perfectly reasonable option to try out,
and a lot of people do prefer it and you might
also.
That said, it doesn’t have any magical fat
burning effects and if you do just fine on
a more traditional fat loss diet, don’t
think that switching to I.F. is going to make
any difference because it probably won’t.
I personally have tried intermittent fasting.
It wasn’t for me and I’ve gotten fairly
lean and then just fine using the typical
five meals spaced throughout a day.
I personally always prefer eating breakfast
and I like eating later at night too, and
I don’t like training fasted and I also
don’t like going long periods without eating.
So it’s just not for me.
In the end, meal frequency and meal timing
is just an issue of personal preference and
it’s about finding the specific lay out
that you most prefer, and if intermittent
fasting is that lay out, then cool and if
not that’s fine too.
Guys, if you find this information helpful
and you want to get a complete step-by-step
road map for losing fat and gaining muscle
at your maximum potential, and in a way that
is practical and sustainable then make sure
to check out my Body Transformation Blueprint
System over at www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
you can click here and the link for that is
also in the description box below.
You can follow me on social media here, if
you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos.
Talk to you again soon.