Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
sorry it’s been a couple weeks since I’ve
uploaded a video, I recently re-launched my
1-on-1 coaching program so that’s taken
up a lot of my time getting that setup over
the last few weeks, and I will link that in
the description box below if you want to check
it out, but today in this video I want to
continue the topic of effective side delt
training which I covered in my last video,
and show you a really great side lateral raise
variation, and one of the very best side delt
exercises out there, and it’s called the
“high incline bench side lateral”.
I don’t know if this actually has an official
name but that’s what we’ll call it for
now.
And this exercise is performed in basically
the exact same way as a regular standing side
lateral raise, except that you’ll be leaning
your upper body against an incline bench.
Having your body pressed against the bench
in a forward leaning position like this helps
to prevent you from using momentum to “swing”
the weights back, and this is going to force
you into a stricter movement pattern to maximize
the tension on your side delts.
So, if you are having trouble really “feeling
it” in your side delts during regular side
lateral raises, or if you just want a new
shoulder exercise to add into your routine,
then these are definitely worth giving a try,
and here’s how to go about doing them.
So you’re just going to set an adjustable
bench at a 60-70 degree angle, because this
will place your body into the proper position
in order to specifically hit the side delts
with maximum tension.
Going much lower than 60 or 70 degrees is
going to shift more stress onto the posterior
head of your shoulder (which is the rear),
and going much higher is going to shift more
stress onto the anterior head (which is the
front).
From there just hold a pair of dumbbells at
your sides and perform a regular standing
side lateral raise just as you normally would.
So you’ll want to keep your shoulders down
and back and depress your scapula in order
to minimize trap involvement.
Flex your abs and lock your rib cage down,
and with a slight 10-30 degree bend in your
elbows raise the weights out to your sides
until your upper arms are parallel to the
floor but no higher.
You’ll also want to make sure that your
hands and your elbows are directly in line
with eachother as you raise the weights up,
and as with any basic side lateral raise,
stick to moderate weights and focus on executing
the movement under strict control for a slightly
higher rep range of about 8-12 reps per set.
So, give the high incline bench side lateral
raise a try and see what you think.
This exercise is a great way to really hone
in on the side delts and it’s especially
useful for lifters who have trouble really
nailing down the proper form on standard side
lateral raises.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn a ton of other valuable
training tips just like this one along with
science-based nutrition and supplementation
information to maximize your muscle building
and your fat burning progress, make sure to
head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and
grab my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System and you can do that by clicking the
icon at the top of the video or by using the
link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.