Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
another Muscle in Minutes Q&A, where I answer
your bodybuilding and fitness questions in
two minutes or less.
So, today's question comes from (Gerard Birchen),
he wants to know what the best post-cardio
meal is.
So, what to eat after a cardio session?
The short and simple answer here is that it's
really not something to concern yourself with.
The specific foods that you eat following
cardio session are really of minor importance.
And I've said this so many times before, but
the main thing you want to focus on when it
comes to muscle building or fat-burning nutrition
is quite simply figuring out your daily calorie
needs in order to reach your goal, as well
as roughly hitting your protein, carbohydrate
and fat needs for the day, and focusing on
hitting those in blocks of about 24 hours,
95% of the results you're going to get are
going to come from the big picture.
And focusing on nitty-gritty details like
what you eat before a cardio session or after
a cardio session is really going to do nothing
more than overcomplicate your plan without
providing any real additional boost to your
results.
The other thing to keep in mind and I've said
this again, so many times before is that nutrient
absorption is a very gradual process.
So, if you ate a meal within a few hours of
your cardio session, those same nutrients
are still being broken down and absorbed even
after your cardio session is finished.
And also on the issue of glycogen replenishment
which a lot of people want to talk about,
you know, saying that you need to immediately
replenish your glycogen levels following cardio
or weight training.
Again, weight training and cardio do not deplete
glycogen levels to any significant degree.
And even if they do, there's no need to immediately
replenish those levels unless you're training
the same muscle groups again on the same day.
So, again, short and simple answer, hit your
calories and your macronutrient over 24-hour
blocks and don't worry too much about the
specifics of your pre and post cardio nutrition.
So, that's your question answered.
If you have a question that you would like
answered, just head over to the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook page.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
Like the page and then leave your question
on the page.
And I'll either answer the question there
or make a video response just like this one.
So, thanks for watching this video.
Don't forget to grab your free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide, over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
Please make sure to like, comment and subscribe.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Thursday night.
Thanks again for watching.
I'll talk to you again soon.