Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, SeanNal.com,
BodyTransformationTruth.com with just some
quick thoughts that I was having earlier today.
A really important perspective to have any
time you set out to reach a particular goal
I think, is to basically be able to separate
your ego from the process and to be able to
look at setbacks and even flat out regression
as just being nothing more than forms of feedback
that you can use to adjust your actions moving
forward.
A lot of people when they don't seem to be
making progress toward a particular goal will
tend to look at that and automatically say
things like, "I guess there's something wrong
with ME", "maybe I'm not cut out for this",
"I failed", rather than saying what's actually
much more likely true, which is just that
"there's something wrong with the set of actions
that I'm taking", "there's something wrong
with my plan that needs to be changed", "it's
not ME, it's my approach".
You should already know any time you make
the decision to reach a certain goal whether
it's with fitness or business or some sort
of social goal or anything else, that there
absolutely 100% are going to be obstacles
and setbacks along the way.
You should already know this for sure at the
very outset before you get started and so
it shouldn't be any surprise at all when they
show up and it shouldn't be any reason to
get discouraged or to stop.
You're here and you want to get here and it's
not going to be a straight line, it's going
to look more something like this, and so if
you can't accept that before starting then
you might as well not even bother because
that's what it's going to look like.
And people make the mistake of thinking that
those plateaus or those regressions are quote
unquote "failures", when in reality it's all
just part of one single process.
There's no actual failure unless you stop
and you give up because then you're 100% guaranteed
to never get there, but as long as you keep
going and you just keep adjusting and adapting
to the feedback you're getting then there's
no question of "failure" because when ou do
reac that end goal, again, it's all just part
of one process.
And it's like this with all areas of life.
For example anybody who has learned to play
a musical instrument, I play the guitar so
I know what that's like, you were probably
completely terrible when you first started,
you could barely even hold your hands in the
right place, but that didn't bother you because
you expected that that was going to be the
case when you got started, it was a new skill
that you had to learn.
But you tried one thing and you "failed" and
then you adjusted based on that, and then
you tried another thing and you "failed" and
you adjusted based on that and you just kept
going and going and going and using those
little "failures" as feedback and then eventually
over time you got better and you learned to
play proficiently.
So it's like that with everything else in
life, again, fitness, business, school, your
social life, sports, whatever it is.
It's a messy process to get from A to B, and
you should expect that right from the start,
and you should just treat every challenge
that shows up as being new information that
you can then use to adjust your plan moving
forwrad until you eventually get to your goal.
And that's why you hear quotes like, you know,
"hard work beats talent when talent doesn't
work hard" or things like that, which is true
because a lot of the time it's not the most
naturally skilled people or the most intelligent
people that accomplish their goals and follow
through on things, it's literally just people
who stick to things and just keep going and
going and going both when things are going
well and when they're not.
The right formula to get to where you want
to go already exists, it's already out there,
and so it's just a matter of having the perseverence
I guess you could say, to just keep adapting
and adjusting until you land on that right
formula.
So I hope this video helpful, make sure to
like, comment and subscribe if you did, you
can check out my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking here or using
the link in the description box, and you can
also check out my blog over at SeanNal.com.
Talk to you again soon.