It's not uncommon to hear that 
volume drives muscle hypertrophy.
Specifically, it's thought more volume 
could produce more muscle hypertrophy,  
probably up until a certain point.
However, volume is quite a broad term. In 
general, it refers to how much work you perform.
This can be quantified in a variety of ways, 
including the number of sets you perform for  
an exercise or muscle group, the product of 
the number of sets and repetitions you perform,  
the product of the number of sets, 
repetitions, and loads you use,  
or even the product of the number of sets, 
repetitions, load, and range of motion you use.
Volume load is the product of the number of sets, 
repetitions, and loads you use. For example,  
if you perform 3 sets of 10 repetitions on 
the barbell bench press with a 100kg load,  
this equals a volume load 
of 3000kg for this exercise.
It's not uncommon to see individuals state that 
volume load is what drives muscle hypertrophy.  
I've even come across numerous researchers 
who have suggested this in their papers.
In this video, I'll detail why this is a mistake,  
and why I believe volume load is 
actually unrelated to muscle hypertrophy.
First, we'll evaluate some research that may lead 
you to believe volume load drives hypertrophy,  
then we'll then look at numerous other papers  
which demonstrate volume load 
is not related to hypertrophy.
Finally, we'll briefly touch on what form of  
volume likely drives hypertrophy.
 
Let us begin with the research that  
may lead you to assume volume 
load drives muscle hypertrophy.
One example comes from the research on rep ranges.
Schoenfeld et al. had 17 men with at least  
1 year of training experience 
perform a range of exercises.
One group of subjects, who we'll call a 
strength group, performed each exercise for  
7 sets of 3 repetitions to failure (the point 
at which no more repetitions can be peformed).
Another group of subjects, who 
we'll call the hypertrophy group,  
performed each exercise for 3 
sets of 10 repetitions to failure.
The reason the strength group performed more sets  
per exercise was to equate the 
volume load between both groups.
Both groups attempted to increase the load 
they used within their rep range every week.
After 8 weeks of training, the 
total volume load performed on  
each exercise was similar between both groups.  
Moreover, increases in a biceps growth 
measurement were similar between both groups.
Therefore, given volume load was similar 
between both groups, and both groups seem to  
have experienced similar hypertrophy, you may 
think volume load may be driving hypertrophy.
Another example comes from the 
research on rest intervals.
Schoenfeld et al. had 13 men with at least 6 
months of training experience perform a range of  
exercises each for 3 sets of repetitions to 
failure with an 8-12 rep-max load, three times per  
week for 8 weeks. All subjects aimed to increase 
the load used within the rep range every week.
One group of subjects, who 
we'll call a long rest group,  
performed this while resting 
for 3 minutes between sets.
Another group of subjects, who 
we'll call a short rest group,  
performed this while resting 
for 1 minute between sets.
Throughout the 8 weeks of training, the long 
rest group was achieving greater volume loads on  
all their exercises versus the short rest group. 
This makes sense, as resting for longer between  
sets enables you to perform more repetitions 
to failure, thus increasing the volume load.
By the end of the study, increases in 
growth measurements for the elbow flexors,  
triceps brachii, anterior quadriceps, and 
vastus lateralis favored the long rest group.
Therefore, as the as the long rest 
group peformed higher volume loads,  
and experienced greater muscle growth,  
the results would lead you to assume higher 
volume loads drive more muscle hypertrophy.
So, the two examples we've just given support 
the idea that volume load may drive hypertrophy.
If studies like these were 
the only ones that existed,  
the evidence would be indeed promising that 
volume load is a driver of hypertrophy.
However, there does exist many other 
studies in which volume load appears  
to be unrelated to hypertrophy.
 
If we examined the research on rep  
ranges in more depth, we'd find great evidence 
volume load does not drive muscle hypertrophy.
As explored in previous videos, there's quite 
a bit of evidence that with all other training  
variables equal, performing repetitions to 
or very close to failure with a 30% one-rep  
max load is as effective for muscle hypertrophy as  
performing repetitions to or very close 
to failure with an 80% one-rep max load.
As a note, an individual can roughly perform 
30-ish repetitions to failure with a 30%  
one-rep max load, and roughly 8 to 12 repetitions 
to failure with an 80% one-rep max load.
Now, here's the thing, the volume load 
you achieve with a 30% one-rep max load  
is greater than the volume load you 
achieve with an 80% one-rep max load.
For instance, Lim et al. had 21 
previously untrained men train the  
leg press and leg extension each for three 
sets, three times per week for 10 weeks.
One group of subjects performed repetitions 
to failure each set with a 30% one-rep  
max load, while another group of subjects peformed  
repetitions to failure each set 
with an 80% one-rep max load.
The average volume load used for 
both exercises was greater for the  
subjects that trained with a 30% one-rep max load.
However, growth of slow-twitch 
and fast-twitch fibers from the  
vastus lateralis muscle was similar between 
training with a 30% and 80% one-rep max load.
Therefore, the rep range research 
demonstrates that higher volume loads do  
not neccessarily produce more muscle hypertrophy.
Additionally, the rep range research also 
demonstrates that your ability to increase  
the volume load you perform overtime probably 
doesn't relate to muscle hypertrophy either.
Illustrating this, Schoenfeld et al. had a group 
of men with between 1.5 to 9 years of training  
experience perform a range of exercises each 
for 3 sets, three times per week for 8 weeks.
One group of subjects,  
who we'll call a high rep group, performed 
25-35 repetitions to failure each set.
Another group of subjects, who 
we'll call a moderate rep group,  
performed 8-12 repetitions to failure each set.
Both groups attempted to increase the load they 
could lift within their rep ranges every week.
By the 8th and final week of the study, 
the high rep group had increased their  
volume load performed for all exercises 
by 31,305kg compared to the first week.
Opposingly, the moderate rep 
group, compared to the first week,  
increased their volume load performed 
for all exercises only by 10,714kg.
However, as we know from other data, both the 
high rep and moderate rep groups would likely have  
experienced similar muscle hypertrophy, indicating 
your ability to increase volume load overtime is  
likely not related to muscle hypertrophy.
Progressing further, the research on 
training to failure further supports  
the idea volume load is not a 
driver of muscle hypertrophy.
Training to failure would result 
in a higher volume load compared  
to stopping your repetitions 
a couple short of failure.
However, the research generally seems to show 
that performing your repetitions 1 to 3 reps  
away from failure is similarly effective to 
training to failure for muscle hypertrophy.
For example, Santanielo et al. had men 
with an average of 5 years of training  
experience perform the unilateral leg 
press and unilateral leg extension  
with a 75% one-rep max load, 
twice per week for 10 weeks.
Subjects trained one leg with repetitions to 
failure, we'll call this the failure condition.
Their other leg performed repetitions 
roughly 3-1 reps away from failure.  
We'll call this the non-failure condition.
The total volume load performed in the 10 
weeks was greater with the failure condition.  
However, growth of the vastus lateralis 
was similar between both conditions,  
further supporting the idea volume 
load does not drive muscle hypertrophy.
As a final point, there's evidence 
if you equate training volume load  
between a condition that trains to failure,  
and one that trains very far from failure, 
muscle hypertrophy outcomes are dissimilar.
Demonstrating this, a study by Lasevicuis 
et al. had previously untrained men perform  
the unilateral leg extension with a 30% 
one-rep max load, twice per week for 8 weeks.
Each session, subjects trained one leg 
with 3 sets of repetitions to failure.  
We'll call this the failure condition.
With their other leg, they aimed performed 
roughly 7 sets of repetitions that were  
roughly 14 repetitions away from failure. 
We'll call this the non-failure condition.
By the end of the study, total training volume 
load was similar between both conditions.  
However, quadriceps growth was much 
greater for the failure condition,  
demonstrating volume load is not 
necessarily related to muscle hypertrophy.
To conclude,  
despite there being some evidence that may lead 
you to believe volume load drives hypertrophy,  
other studies falsify this by demonstrating 
volume load is unrelated to muscle hypertrophy.
So, if volume load is not the form of volume 
that relates to muscle growth, what is?.
It seems the number of sets you perform for your  
muscle groups is what appears to 
be related to muscle hypertrophy.
More precisely, in this case, a set would 
probably be defined as a bout of repetitions  
between 5 and 35, performed 3 or fewer 
repetitions from the point of failure.
Next video, we'll be attempting to 
uncover the precise relationship  
the number of sets you perform 
has with muscle hypertrophy.
We'll be aiming to answer questions such as 
do more sets always equal more hypertrophy?  
Is there a point where more sets provide 
no further benefit for muscle hypertrophy,  
or even a point where more sets 
actually reduces hypertrophy?