Last video, we detailed how the current research,  
as well as mechanistic reasoning, imply 
stopping between 0 to 3 repetitions away from  
failure can produce similar muscle 
hypertrophy to training to failure.
For clarification, when I say stopping 
between 0 to 3 repetitions away from failure,  
I'm referring to leaving between 
0 to 3 repetitions in reserve.  
That is, leaving 0 repetitions in reserve 
indicates you stopped at the point where  
you feel you cannot perform another full 
repetition, while leaving 3 repetitions  
in reserve indicates you believe could 
have performed 3 more full repetitions.
Additionally, failure refers to technical failure,  
the point at which no more repetitions 
with correct execution can be performed.
This definition was essentially 
used in the studies we assessed,  
and I believe this is probably the most 
sensible definition as it makes little  
sense to significantly deviate from using 
the correct execution for muscle hypertrophy.
For example, in a barbell biceps curl, 
technical failure would refer to the  
point where you can no longer flex your elbows 
upwards while maintaining a fairly rigid posture,  
as your elbow flexor muscles can no 
longer produce the required force.
If you were to try to continue 
and start introducing momentum,  
either via swinging your back or using your 
legs, your spinal erectors or leg muscles would  
be contributing towards moving the weight, your 
elbow flexors would not be doing any more work  
(and in some instances, its 
recruitment might actually decrease).
Of course, in the real world, your execution 
will likely deviate slightly as you get closer  
and closer to failure, but it's likely sensible 
to try your best to minimize any deviation.
Returning to the topic of this video, 
as noted, leaving 0 to 3 repetitions in  
reserve likely produces similar muscle 
hypertrophy to training to failure.
But, there's a potential 
problem with implementing this.
A person might be inaccurate at 
estimating how close to failure  
they truly are. An individual may think 
they've left 3 repetitions in reserve,  
but they might have truly left 5 or 
even more repetitions in reserve.
How common is underestimating 
proximity to failure?
Moreover, how could an individual ensure greater  
accuracy in estimating how 
close to failure they are?
A recent 2020 meta-analysis by Halperin 
et al. answers these questions.
They combined the results of 12 
studies that examined how well  
individuals estimate their proximity to failure.
Before detailing the findings, it's worth briefly 
understanding the design of the included studies.
The 12 studies had a mix of designs.
The studies ranged from having subjects 
perform repetitions to failure with a 50  
to 90% one-rep max load. Most of 
the studies used compound exercises,  
with the back squat and bench 
press being commonly used.
Although, other exercises like leg 
presses, chest presses, trap bar deadlifts,  
as well as biceps and triceps isolation 
exercises were also used in a few studies.
Some studies had subjects estimate 
how many repetitions they think they  
could perform with a given load on an 
exercise before performing the set,  
others had subjects estimate at some point during 
the set. For instance, a few studies had subjects  
stop at the 10th repetition with a 70% one-rep 
max load to report how many more repetitions  
they think they could achieve before they 
went onto complete repetitions until failure.
Furthermore, a few studies alternatively had 
subjects report once they felt they reached a  
certain number of repetitions in reserve. For 
example, subjects reported once they felt they  
hit the point of 3 repetitions in reserve before 
returning and performing repetitions to failure.
Let's move on to the results.
Combining the 12 studies results,  
on average, subjects actually only underestimated 
their proximity to failure by 1 repetition.  
Although, as evidenced by the graph, 
there was quite some variation. A fair  
few subjects underestimated their proximity 
to failure by 1 to 3 repetitions. However,  
some subjects underestimated their proximity 
to failure by as much as 10 to 13 repetitions.
Let's now explore some meta-regressions 
performed that can aid an individual  
in improving their accuracy at 
estimating proximity to failure.
Accuracy increased when subjects gave 
their predictions closer to failure.  
This means that studies in which subjects 
reported how many repetitions they thought  
they could perform before a set produced less 
accurate estimates compared to studies in  
which subjects reported estimates at some 
point during a set. Also, during a set,  
making a prediction closer to failure is better 
than making a prediction father from failure.
These findings imply that if an individual 
plans to train with repetitions in reserve,  
it's likely best to avoid pre-planning how 
many repetitions you think will achieve  
this before the set. Instead, you should 
simply perform your repetitions and  
end the set only once you truly feel you've 
reached the desired proximity to failure.
Accuracy was much better when subjects trained 
with heavier loads that resulted in fewer  
repetitions. Using loads that resulted 
in more than 12 repetitions performed  
generally resulted in greater underestimations. 
These findings make sense, with higher repetitions  
(and thus lighter loads), there's 
a lot more room for error.  
Additionally, lighter loads and higher 
repetitions have been shown to produce  
greater perceived exertion and discomfort compared 
to using heavier loads and fewer repetitions.  
These factors can mask an individual's ability 
to truly delineate their proximity to failure.
For muscle hypertrophy, we know 
it's quite likely loads between 30%  
to 85% one-rep max are similarly effective at 
building muscle. Therefore, it's probably sensible  
for individuals to train on the heavier side of 
this if they wish to use repetitions in reserve.
Accuracy slightly improved during predictions 
in later sets compared to earlier sets.
This could be for a couple of reasons. 
Firstly, remember that technically the  
subjects of the studies took 
all their sets to failure,  
they just estimated their proximities to failure 
at certain time points before achieving failure.  
As a consequence, those earlier sets to failure 
may have acutely made them more accustomed  
and aware of the feeling of failure, thereby 
enhancing their prediction accuracy in later sets.
The potential implication of this 
is that if you're someone who  
prefers to mix in failure and leaving 
repetitions in reserve in a session,  
it might be better to perform 
your failure sets first.
For example, let's say you perform 4 sets 
with a certain load on the triceps skull  
crusher in a session. Performing the 
first 2 sets to failure may set you  
up for being more accurate if you were to use 
repetitions in reserves for the last two sets.
Accuracy was slightly worse with lower body 
exercises versus upper body exercises. It's  
useful to be aware of this and recognize you may 
have to push slightly harder than you naturally  
anticipate if you use repetitions in 
reserve with lower body exercises.
Finally, and quite unexpectedly, training 
status minimally impacted accuracy.  
That is, on average, having multiple years 
of resistance training experience seemingly  
did not significantly enhance an individual's 
ability to predict how close to failure they are.
It's not clear why this is.
Although I'm not certain, it might simply be 
because many of the trained individuals in  
these studies may not have had a fair degree 
of experience with training to failure.
It seems reasonable to think if the researchers 
divided the trained individuals into those with  
minimal to no experience of training to 
failure and those with a fair degree of  
failure training experience, an effect might 
be seen such that those with failure training  
experience would be more accurate than 
those with no failure training experience.
If true, which I think it probably 
would be as it makes logical sense,  
gaining experience and familiarity with 
training to failure should enhance your  
accuracy when you use repetitions in reserve.
Perhaps you may perform a select few of your sets 
for a given exercise with repetitions to failure,  
or you could dedicate occasional blocks where 
most of your sets are performed to failure.
In summary, the current literature, although 
there is some variability, intriguing  
indicates individuals only underestimate their 
proximity to failure by one repetition on average.
Generally, it's best not to pre-plan how 
many repetitions you should perform with a  
given load to reach a certain proximity to 
failure, rather simply perform repetitions  
with this load and stop only once you truly feel 
you've reached your desired proximity to failure.
Training with heavier loads and lower 
repetitions likely makes it easier to  
estimate your proximity to failure versus 
lighter loads and higher repetitions.
It's worth being aware individuals tend to be 
more accurate with estimates in later sets,  
as well as with upper body exercises 
compared to lower body exercises.
Finally, it's likely gaining a fair degree 
of experience with training to failure is  
beneficial for being accustomed and familiar 
with how failure feels to you, thereby plausibly  
enhancing your ability to estimate your closeness 
to failure when you do use repetitions in reserve.