What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and today’s question is do squats and deadlifts
increase testosterone levels.
The idea here being that because squats and
deadlifts are such challenging movements and
because they train so many large muscle groups
at the same time that performing them is going
to significantly boost your overall testosterone
and growth hormone levels and that’s going
to help you build more muscle throughout your
entire body as a result in comparison to not
having them in your plan.
You probably heard the idea that doing squats
will help you build bigger biceps and that’s
where the, sort of, old school idea comes
from.
So, what’s the truth here?
The way I would sum it up is like this: Yes,
heavy resistance training does increase testosterone
levels and bigger, more challenging compound
exercises do increase testosterone levels
to a larger degree than smaller less challenging
isolation exercises.
However, the hormonal increase that you get
form this are only short, temporary spikes
that go back to baseline fairly quickly.
And because of that it doesn’t necessarily
mean that those increases are going to actually
going to carry over and give you a noticeable
improvement in bottom line muscle growth.
The key thing to understand is that, in order
for testosterone levels to significantly affect
your size and strength gains, those levels
have to be elevated by a large percentage
and then sustained over a long period of time.
So even if a barbell squat might give you
a bigger, temporary increase in testosterone
than a light press, and the research actually
shows that it does, that doesn’t automatically
mean that those hormonal effects are actually
going to help you build more muscle from it.
And there actually have been several studies
on this, looking at how certain exercises
or training protocols affect hormone levels
and whether that translates to greater gains
in size and strength.
When you look at the data, that’s basically
what you see.
You either see that the increase in hormone
levels has no direct effect on muscle growth
at all, or you see some minor effect but that
the correlation is very weak.
I won’t go into the details on all of that
but I’ll link the main studies in the description
box if you do want to check them out.
So in terms of practical recommendations,
I just don’t think this whole question of,
do squats increase testosterone, or do deadlifts
increase testosterone; it’s just not something
that has any real direct use for you.
So if you’re someone who can’t perform
squats or deadlifts then I don’t think you’re
missing out on anything important from a hormonal
perspective.
And if you are performing them I wouldn’t
go out of my way to do it more often or with
more volume just for the sake of trying to
increase your testosterone levels higher.
I mean, it’s possible that if you were a
high level bodybuilder trying to squeeze out
every possible ounce of muscle growth that
you could, it’s possible that all those
little temporary spikes in testosterone from
doing deadlifts versus not doing deadlifts,
maybe they would add up over the course of
five years and help you gain an extra ten
of a pound of muscle.
I mean, I obviously can’t say what the effects
would be if anything, but for the average
lifter it’s just not something to worry
about.
It’s analogous to like taking a piss in
the ocean basically, where even if there is
an effect, it’s likely so small that you
probably wouldn’t even notice it.
I think it’s pretty safe to say, based on
the research, that muscle growth is primarily
a localize event that happens at the level
of the specifics muscle that you directly
training.
And then totally, you could look at guys who
have huge, ripped upper body who don’t even
train legs, just to see an example of that.
and I think that trying to structure your
training program around the specific goal
of manipulating testosterone or growth hormone
levels, that’s just not going to be a good
use of you effort.
And it could actually be counterproductive
if it takes your focus away from maintaining
a properly balanced program, in terms of exercise,
layouts, volume and frequency.
My advice is to just to put all your focus
on maximizing your overall progression in
the gym and maintaining a properly balanced
program, and then just let the hormonal aspect
take care of itself.
So thanks for watching, guys.
And if you do want to grab a complete step-by-step,
science based plan that will help you accomplish
that as effectively as possible.
The workouts, the meal plans, the supplement
guides, along with one-on-one coaching then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
So I hope you guys found this video helpful.
If you did enjoyed the video as always, make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on Facebook, Instagram
and SnapChat here if you aren’t already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.