What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
I just got back from the gym here and today
was one of those days where just wasn't really
in the mindset to train.
Usually I don't have any issues with it because
I actually enjoy working out most of the time
but you know legs is always a tough workout
and sometimes you're just kind of having an
off day.
I didn't sleep well last night, a lot of work
to do right now and the thought of going to
the gym and training legs just really did
not seem appealing at all.
But what I've really realized after all these
years of consistent training is that it's
exactly that.
It's the thought of going to the gym or the
thought of doing anything physically or mentally
demanding.
The thought itself is the real obstacle rather
than the actual thing.
In other words the anticipation of discomfort
is usually a lot worse than the actual experience
of it.
And the physical and mental state that you're
in while you sit there anticipating the work
ahead is not the same state that you're going
to be in once you're actually there doing
the work itself.
Once you start taking action, it's like your
brain just sort of flips on this switch and
just automatically falls into the zone.
Those negative thoughts just start to shut
off and everything feels different and starts
flowing more easily.
It's the same idea as when you're sitting
there trying to write something but it just
feels like this huge daunting task because
you're thinking about all two thousand words
that you have to write, you're thinking about
it all at once.
And so maybe you feel a bit paralyzed and
you can't get started.
But if you forget about that and just write
the first couple sentences then what you'll
find is that all of a sudden things usually
start to gather momentum and before you know
it you've written two paragraphs which leads
to five paragraphs which leads to ten paragraphs
and then before you know it the full two thousand
words is done.
It's the exact same thing when it comes to
working out.
You're sitting there, you're envisioning the
whole workout that lies ahead, all the individual
sets, all of the exercises and reps are going
to have to do, the physical and mental demands
of it all, when really if you actually break
it all down moment by moment it's not nearly
as bad as you're imagining it to be.
You're picturing the entire workout as a whole
without realizing that you don't have to do
the entire workout as a whole.
You can't do the entire workout as a whole.
The workout itself is ultimately broken down
into individual exercises, individual sets
and individual reps.
And you can only ever do one rep at a time.
So the reality is that the most you ever have
to deal with at any given time is one rep.
That's it.
You only ever have to tolerate one single
rep.
And even that one rep is broken down into
individual phases on its own.
And in that moment when you're performing
that one rep, if you really just physically
feel all the sensations associated with it
without trying to push them away or label
them, really just absorb yourself in it fully,
it's almost like this meditative thing.
You'll actually see that it's never really
that bad and it actually can be even pleasurable
if you start assigning a different meaning
to it and you realize that that physical discomfort
is what's helping you become stronger and
more fit and is moving you towards your goals.
So if it's just one of those days where you're
really just not into it and you feel like
you'd rather stay home on the couch as opposed
to go train, remember that your mental projection
of the workout is not the workout itself.
They're two different things.
One is an imagined thought and one is a real
experience.
And the real experience won't be nearly as
bad as the thought.
That part of your mind that just wants to
find the path of least resistance is literally
just playing tricks on you and you have to
use that rational thinking side to recognize
that and to ignore it.
You have a goal, you have a plan, today's
leg day or whatever it happens to be, and
you just stick to that plan and you move forward
regardless because you know it's the right
thing to do.
Emotions are volatile.
They can be all over the place depending on
a bunch of different factors but if you logically
know it's the right thing to do then you just
do it anyway.
And as you start taking action toward that
goal, you put your gym clothes on, you travel
to the gym, you put your headphones in, do
your warm-up, do your first set, as you do
those things your whole mindset will usually
just automatically shift as you go.
That action just feeds on itself and it creates
more and more momentum, and before you know
it you're right in the middle of your workout
and you realize it's not a big deal.
You might even enjoy it.
And soon enough the work is all done.
And when you're done you always feel way better
than you would have if you had stayed at home
and skipped it.
And in the end you always end up thanking
yourself for it.
So just remember that the anticipation of
discomfort is almost always a lot worse than
the actual experience itself.
What you're imagining in anticipation of the
workout is not what you're actually going
to experience.
And the more and more you just take action
in spite of whatever negative thoughts might
be coming up the more you really start seeing
those thoughts for what they really are and
the less power they have to throw you off
course in the future.
And this applies not only to fitness but pretty
much to every other area of life as well.
So thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this was helpful.
Hit that like button below and leave a comment
if it was.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And you can follow me on Facebook and Instagram
as well if you aren't already.
The links for that are below in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see in the next video.