What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here; www.SeanNal.com.
Just got out of bed, looking pretty tired
here, but I just wanted to quickly pull the
camera out this morning.
I’m sure you guys had really good tasting
and macro-friendly breakfast smoothie recipe
that I just started making this past week
and that I’m really liking.
It’s an apple-cinnamon type of flavor, it
almost like apple pie, really easy to make
and I’ve just been waking up every morning
really craving this thing, so I wanted to
share it here so that you can try it out for
yourself.
So, what you’re going to need is 200 milliliters
of unsweetened almond milk which just a little
bit less than a cup, you can use regular milk
if you want; that’s really up to you.
One scoop of vanilla whey protein powder,
I’m using Optimum Nutrition right now.
25 grams of oats and that’s equal to about
a quarter cup.
125 grams of apple and that going to be equal
to just, like, a typical regular sized apple,
like this, 25 grams of pitted dates, and then
one teaspoon of cinnamon; and then one other
optional addition here would be some natural
peanut butter, if you’re okay bumping the
calories up a little bit higher for some added
flavor, about a tablespoon or so would work
well.
I’m doing a mini cut right now, so I’m
trying to keep my calories a little bit lower
and I also prefer to have more my calories
later in the day so I’m not going to use
the peanut butter in this shake but it definitely
would be a good addition taste wise and to
add some more fat if you want because this
a fairly low fat shake as is.
So I’m just going to go ahead and tossed
everything in now.
Make sure to add some ice as well.
I add five ice cubes to this.
So, putting the almond milk, the oats, one
scoop of vanilla whey, cinnamon, tossed in
the dates and the apple.
And there’s the finished shake there.
The nutritional break down is 410 calories,
30 grams of protein, 59 carbs and 6 grams
of fat.
And again if you want more calories and fat
then you can go ahead and add in some natural
peanut butter, or you can just increase the
overall volume of the ingredients.
So, go ahead and give that breakfast smoothie
recipe a try.
I think you’ll really like it, and let me
know in the comments below what you think.
Thanks for watching guys.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
You can follow me on Facebook, Instagram,
Snapchat here.
You can grab the complete step-by-step Body
Transformation Blueprint here.
And I’ll see you guys in the next video.