What’s going on, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here, www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and the question today is how much muscle
can you gain naturally and in what timeframe?
Now, this is actually a very difficult question
to answer, simply because the numbers can
vary so much from person to person depending
on a lot of different factors.
So keep in mind that any answer that you get
from anybody on this topic is always just
going to be a rough approximation.
That said, having an overall ballpark figure
in mind will at least give you some accurate
expectations, so that number one: you don’t
get scammed out of your money by bullshit
supplements or miracle programs or other products
that give you totally unrealistic ideas of
how much muscle you can gain over a specific
timeframe.
Number two: so that you can set practical
achievable goals and stay on track with your
plan, rather than just program hopping from
one plan to the next like so many people do
because you were convinced that your program
isn’t working that you should be making
faster gains.
So how much muscle can you gain naturally?
Again, ballpark figure, but assuming you’re
on a properly structured program and you’re
following it consistently, guys ranging from
slightly below average genetics to slightly
above average genetics are probably going
to be capable of building somewhere between,
and I noticed this is a pretty wide range,
but probably somewhere between about twenty
to forty pounds of actual lean muscle mass
naturally.
Now your body weight can obviously go up by
more than that because you’ll always gains
some body fat while you’re bulking and you’ll
be holding on to additional water weights
in the process, so it does depend on what
kind of look you’re going for.
But in terms of actual lean muscle mass that’s
a pretty safe range I would say.
So if you have average genetics, then you’ll
probably land somewhere in the middle at about
thirty pounds of muscle.
Slightly below average, maybe around twenty
pounds.
Slightly above average maybe around forty
pounds.
And females can take those numbers and reduce
them by about half.
Again, I know it’s kind of a wide range,
but like I said, there’s really no way of
say exactly how much muscle any specific person
is going to be capable of building.
And around thirty pounds, give or take, will
probably cover the majority of the lifting
population.
And then in addition to that you’re also
going to have small percentage of genetic
outliers, who’re going to fall on the more
extreme ends of the spectrum.
Meaning that you’ll have guys with a particularly
poor muscle building genetics who might only
able to gain, say ten pounds of muscle or
less, regardless of what they do.
Unfortunately that is the case for some people.
But again, it’s only a very small percentage.
And then on the far other side you’re going
to have another very small percentage with
exceptionally good muscle building genetics,
who might be able to gain upward to, say fifty
pounds of muscle.
Again, this is just an educated guess but
it at least gives you some sort of realistic
idea to work with.
I’ve seen a lot of other figures thrown
around online and in my opinion a lot of them
really overestimate what’s realistic or
at the very least they overestimate what’s
realistic while staying at a decently lean
body fat percentage.
And thirty pounds of muscle is not a small
amount by any means.
If you took a guy who was a complete beginner
at a hundred and fifty pounds with an average
build, and then you put thirty pounds of pure
muscle on his frame, plus a bit of extra fat
and a bit of extra water, that’s a lot of
overall mass for someone to gain.
Now, how long will it actually take to build
that muscle?
Again, just an approximation, but assuming
everything is done on a properly structured
program and you’re consistent with it, you
can probably expect to achieve about fifty
percent of your noticeable genetic muscle
building potential in the first year of training.
And it will then slow down by about half for
every year after that.
Remember that muscle growth is not a linear
process, and as you build more and more size
it’s going to become increasingly harder
to make further increases.
This is because muscle is metabolically very
expensive tissue.
Your body doesn’t want to hold on to a high
amount of excess muscle, and so it has a certain
genetics limit in place that prevent you from
putting on too much.
So the further and further you get away from
your natural set point, the harder and harder
your body starts pressing on the brakes, to
slow that process down.
But using that figure, you’d be at around
fifty percent of your genetics potential after
one year, about seventy-five percent after
two years, maybe eighty-five to ninety percent
after three years.
And then after four years and beyond you’d
be pretty close to your natural limit.
You’d still be able to make continued gains
from there.
there are guys training for a decade or more
and they’re still able to make improvements
to their physique but the level of diminishing
return would be so steep at that point that
you’d have to train hard for multiple years
with your nutrition dialed in as well, just
to gain maybe a few extra ponds of actual
new muscle.
That’s my answer.
I think it’s pretty accurate for most people
in most situations.
As a natural trainee, a realistic expectation
would be anywhere from about twenty to forty
pounds of total lean muscle mass depending
on your genetics, with about thirty pounds
being the average.
And you could build not all but the vast majority
of that muscle over a span of about four years.
For some guys it might be three years.
For some guys it might be five.
But four years, give or take, is a pretty
safe bet.
Now, what are the factors that are going to
influence exactly how much muscle you can
build and how fast you can build it?
There’s a few main things.
The first huge one to take into account is
of course genetics.
Regardless of what anyone tells you genetics
do play a very significant role in any given
person rate of muscle growth as well as their
ultimate muscle building potential.
As well as what that muscle will actually
looked like from an aesthetic stand point
once it built.
In terms of actual muscle growth itself we’ve
got things like testosterone levels, growth
hormone levels, muscle fiber type, insulin
sensitivity, myostatin levels, these are just
a few factors of many.
And then along with that you have to take
into account your height, your joint size,
your overall bone structure, your muscle shape,
your muscle insertions, all of these things
will affect how your physique actually looks
once that muscle is gained.
For example, fifteen pound of new muscle on
a guy who is 5’5’’ with a smaller bone
structure, that’s going to appear much differently
than those same fifteen pounds on a guy who’s
6’4’’ with a lanky frame.
Age also comes into play here as well, because
guys who are in their late teens and twenties
are naturally going to build muscle at the
fastest rate because their testosterone levels
will be in the optimal muscle building range.
Whereas guys who are in their early teens
or who are in the forty to fifty plus age
range, they’re going to gain muscle at a
slower rate because testosterone levels won’t
be as high.
Experience levels also comes into play like
I already touched on, the less experience
you are the fasters you’ll make gains and
vice versa, and also whether you’re gaining
that muscle for the first time or regaining
muscle that you lost.
And that’s because regaining lost muscle
that happens a lot faster than building brand
new muscle.
So if you took a lay off in training, your
rate of growth would be faster.
Or if you’re someone who was recovering
from an illness like an eating disorder, the
overall amount of muscle mass that you could
gain from when you start would be a lot higher.
And then on top of all of this, the assumption
here is that you’re natural, because steroids
will dramatically alter how much muscle you
can gain.
And the assumption is also that you’re following
a proper program and consistently sticking
to it, because if your program or your consistency
are subpar then all these figures are obviously
go straight out the window.
In then end though, the whole question of
how much muscle can you build it honestly
isn’t something I’d spend too much time
getting hung up on, because you really have
no way of knowing from the outset what your
exact muscle building potential will be anyway
or how that muscle is going to look on your
frame once its built.
So as long you just have rough idea of what’s
possible in mind then that’s going to be
good enough and it doesn’t have much practical
use for you beyond that point.
So the best thing you can do is just get your
training and nutrition dialed in.
Be consistent.
Be patient.
And focus on maximizing your individual rate
of muscle growth and then see what your genetics
have in store for you and just make the most
of your situation depending on your goals.
That’s really all there is to it.
So, I hope this was helpful, guys.
If you want to get a complete step-by-step
plan to help you maximize your genetic muscle
building potential in the most efficient way
possible, including fully structured workout
plans, meal plans, supplement guides and one-on-one
coaching, then make sure to head over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete Body Transformation Blueprint
System.
You can do that by clicking here at the top
of the screen or by using the link in the
description box below.
If you enjoyed the video, as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me social media here if
you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.