Bro, don't you know isolation 
exercises do nothing?
What are you on about?
Science has shown adding isolation exercises to a  
compound exercise program does 
not produce more muscle growth.
Wait, what?
You sure this is the correct 
interpretation of the research?
Let me check what House of Hypertrophy has to say.
Are compound exercises (exercises that train two  
or more muscle groups) enough 
for maxing muscle hypertrophy?
And are isolation exercises (exercises that 
train one muscle group) just a waste of time?
A couple of scientific papers have 
suggested this. Let us examine them.
A 2015 Brazillian study by Gentil et al. compared 
lat pulldowns to barbell biceps curls for elbow  
flexor growth. The elbow flexors consisted of 
the biceps and brachialis muscles in this case.
After 10 weeks of training, increases 
in elbow flexor thickness were similar  
between the lat pulldown and biceps curl training.
Suggesting an isolation exercise (the biceps curl)  
does not produce any more growth to 
a compound exercise (the latpulldown)
However, this study does not tell us if 
compared to only performing lat pulldowns,  
the combination of lat pulldowns and 
curls could enhance elbow flexor growth.
Fortunately, another 2013 Brazillian 
study by Gentil et al. evaluated this.
Group one only trained the 
bench press and lat pulldown.
Group two performed the bench press 
and lat pulldown with the addition of  
a biceps curl and triceps extension.
Both groups performed 3 sets of 
8-12 repetitions to failure on each  
exercise per session. This meant training volume 
was not equated between both groups. As group two  
performed two additional isolation exercises, they 
would have accumulated higher training volumes.
Despite this, after 10 weeks of training,  
increases in elbow flexor thickness 
were similar between both groups.
Indicating adding biceps curls 
to lat pulldown training does not  
enhance elbow flexor growth versus 
only training lat pulldowns.
Unfortunately, the researchers did not 
assess triceps growth in this study.
In 2015, another Brazillian study by Franca et 
al. further supported these previous findings.
Group one trained with the following training 
program, consisting of only compound exericses.
Group two trained with all 
the same compound exercises,  
but performed two added 
isolation exercises per session.
Both groups performed 3 sets of 10-15 
reps for each exercise per session,  
again meaning group two would have 
accumulated higher training volumes.
After 8 weeks of training, 
increases in arm circumference  
were statistically similar between both groups.
Suggesting yet again that additional  
isolation exercises provide no 
further muscle growth benefit.
These three research papers (the ones 
just overviewed) were later included  
in a 2017 review study by Gentil et al., 
in which it was stated "the addition of SJ  
exercises to an MJ exercise program does not seem 
to increase gains in muscle size and strength".
SJ stands for single-joint,  
which are isolation exercises, while MJ stands 
for multi-joint, which are compound exercises.
Before moving on, it's worth 
noting that since 2017,  
4 additional studies all published by 
Barbalho et al. further indicate that  
additional isolation exercises to a compound 
exercise program do not enhance muscle growth.
However, it's recently been established 
much research by Barbalho et al. contains  
improbable and atypical data. The data 
in these studies cannot be trusted,  
perhaps because the data is illegitimate.
Thus, I believe we cannot use these 
studies as additional evidence.
Hello There. You're killing your gains.
So it's clear some researchers speculate 
compound exercises may indeed max hypertrophy.
But as many of you are probably thinking, 
surely there exist limitations and shortcomings.
Indeed, I believe there are, and many of 
these limitations were nicely discussed in  
a paper by Ribeiro et al. that was directly 
responding to the Gentil et al. review paper
Firstly, only growth of the elbow 
flexors and arms were measured,  
and only at a single region of these muscles 
(roughly the midpoints of the muscles).
This begs the question,  
what about other regions of these muscles, 
and what about other muscle groups?
Examining the question about other 
regions of the same muscle first,  
I believe there's sufficient evidence 
to believe regional hypertrophy exists.
That is, an exercise for a muscle does not 
grow all regions of that muscle equally,  
rather it grows some regions more than others.
For example, Kawakami et al. found after subjects 
trained overhead extensions for 16 weeks,  
the triceps mainly increased in cross-sectional 
area in the middle to slightly lower regions.  
But in the most upper and lower regions of 
the muscle, little growth was experienced.
Likewise, Ema et al. found after 
leg extension training for 12 weeks,  
growth not only differed between 
the quadriceps heads but within  
each of these muscle heads, growth differed 
between the upper and lower regions of them.
This data might suggest that if we wanted to 
maximize growth across as many regions of a  
muscle as possible, using a range of exercises 
that biomechanically differ could work.
The biomechanically different exercises,  
when compared to each other, may target different 
regions of the muscle more so than others,  
so collectively they maximize growth 
across the regions of a muscle.
Isolation exercises would be 
necessary and pivotal in this.
A 2021 Brazillian study by 
Costa et al. supports this.
22 men were allocated into a 
non-varied or varied group.
Both groups trained 3 days per week for 8 weeks
The non-varied group did train with 
both compound and isolation exercises,  
but they performed the exact same 
exercises on the 3 training days per week.
The varied group, on each 
of the three days per week,  
performed different compound and isolation 
exercises for their muscle groups.
Before and after the study, the researchers 
measured the thickness of the upper, middle,  
and lower regions of the rectus femoris, 
vastus lateralis, elbow flexors, and triceps.
In a couple of measured regions, increases 
were similar between both groups.  
However, in other measured regions, 
gains favored the varied group.  
Thus, the varied group experienced 
the most regional hypertrophy overall.
As a result, this study suggests performing a 
couple of different exercises for a muscle group  
(specifically 3 different isolation 
and compound movements per week)  
promotes growth across regions of a muscle.
Moving forward, other muscle 
groups not examined in the three  
previously mentioned studies are likely 
minimally trained with compound exercises.
The lateral deltoid abducts the shoulder joint.  
No compound exercise significantly involves 
this motion, so isolation exercises that do this  
(like lateral raises) are likely required 
to maximally grow the lateral deltoid.
The calf muscles plantarflex the ankle, a motion 
that no compound exercise significantly involves.  
So plantarflexion exercises 
like seated and standing calf  
raises are likely needed to max calf hypertrophy.
Compound exercises training the hamstrings 
primarily do so via hip extension movement.
However, the hamstrings also flex the knee, 
and there's evidence different parts of the  
hamstrings may be recruited during either hip 
extension and knee flexion motion. Thus, knee  
flexion exercises (like leg curls) are probably 
needed to max regional hamstring hypertrophy.
Compound exercises that train the quadriceps 
seem to grow the vasti muscle heads very well,  
but not the rectus femoris. Leg 
extensions and reverse nordic  
curls significantly develop the rectus femoris,  
so one of these isolation exercises are likely 
necessary to optimally grow all quadricep heads.
As for the triceps, two studies 
indicate the bench press fairly  
develops the lateral and medial triceps 
heads, but minimally the long head.
You see, the long head crosses 
both the shoulder and elbow joints  
(the lateral and medial heads 
only cross the elbow joint).
And many compound exercises that train the triceps 
(like the bench press, push-up, and even dips)  
involve shoulder extension during the lowering 
phase of the exercise, a motion that shortens the  
long head and inhibits it from significantly 
producing force during the lifting phase.
Isolation exercises such as skull 
crushers, overhead extensions,  
and rope pushdowns have all been shown 
to significantly develop the long head.
Moreover, recall the Costa et al. study 
found training with a variety of triceps  
isolation exercises in a week resulted in 
growth across more regions of the triceps.
It’s clear substantial hypertrophy can 
be achieved with compound exercises only.
Yet the conclusion compound 
exercises are sufficient for  
muscle hypertrophy is likely incorrect.
Many muscle groups and regions of a muscle 
group are likely not optimally trained with  
compound exercises, hence additional 
isolation exercises are necessary.