Hey, what's up?
It's Sean Nalewanyj here from MuscleGainTruth.com.
And in today's video lesson, I'm going to
be giving you a piece of advice that is literally
going to change your life.
It's going to allow you to get the same or
even better results from your body building
program while putting in less effort.
And what could be better than that, right?
So, make sure you pay attention to this.
Now, a very, very common piece of body building
advice that you've no doubt read about, because
95% of experts will promote this idea is the
concept of eating frequently throughout the
day.
It's said that in order to maximize your body
building results, you need to be eating, you
know, around six meals a day, spaced out every
two to three hours.
And this advice is given because it said that,
eating frequently throughout the day is going
to keep your body in a net anabolic state.
It's going to prevent muscle breakdown.
And it's going to keep your resting -- fat
burning metabolic rate elevated.
Now, the reality is that if you actually look
into the research behind this idea, well,
it does seem to make sense logically, the
research is actually pretty clear in demonstrating
that meal frequency has little to no effect
on your overall body composition.
Eating frequently throughout the day, does
not increase muscle growth.
It does not reduce muscle breakdown.
And it doesn't increase fat loss.
And again, this is -- this is pretty clearly
demonstrated.
The reality is that digestion is an incredibly
gradual process.
It's not like you eat a meal, and then that
meal goes into your stomach, and into your
digestive tract, into the small intestine,
the nutrients are absorbed, and they're shuttled
into your cells, and then in three hours you
must eat again.
It's an incredibly gradual process.
Even the fastest digesting proteins are still
absorbed only at a rate of about a few grams
per hour.
In reality, an average size meals probably
going to keep your body in a net anabolic
state for anywhere between five to seven hours,
and even if you go over that by say, an hour
or two, it's not like the whole world is going
to collapse, and you're going to, you know,
lose a ton of muscle just because you waited
an extra hour or two.
So, my advice to you is pretty simple.
And that is that, if you're looking to maximize
your muscle gains or you're trying to burn
fat, as long as you're getting around three
meals a day, spaced around every five to seven
hours apart, you're pretty much doing everything
you can from a meal frequency perspective
to maximize your results.
By far the most important thing you need to
worry about is not when you're doing blocks
of two to three hours, but rather what you're
doing in blocks up to 24 hours.
And what I -- what I mean by that is that,
you know, 95% or more of the results that
you get from your body building nutrition
program are going to be the result of hitting
your overall calorie totals for a 24-hour
period.
So, you need to be obviously in a net calorie
surplus in order to feel muscle growth.
So that's -- that's the foundational principle,
and then, making sure that you roughly hit
your protein, carbohydrate, and fat amounts
for the day, and from the proper food sources.
As long as you're doing that, how you spaced
those meals out is going to have a very, very
minimal impact on your bottom line results.
Now, if for some reason that makes you feel
psychologically better to be eating frequently
throughout the day or you just have a big
appetite, and you prefer to eat that way,
then that's totally fine, go right ahead.
But if you're like me, and if you find eating
every two or three hours to be pretty burdensome,
and you don't like the idea of having to stress
out, you know, every two or three hours, oh,
I haven't eaten, you know, where's -- where's
my next meal going to come from?
I'm in a -- I'm in a catabolic state.
If you'd -- if you'd prefer to be free from
that, then take this piece of advice, because
again, as I said, the research is pretty clear
in showing that meal frequency has little
to no impact on your bottom line results.
So, I hope you found this video lesson useful.
If you want to get a free step-by-step meal
plan that lays out exactly what you need to
be meeting each day, the foods, the protein
amounts, the calories, just head over to MuscleGainTruth.com.
The link is in the description box.
You're just going to enter a few stats about
yourself, your age, your height, weight, activity
level, your goals, and, you know, a step-by-step
meal plan will be laid out for you to follow
instantly without any, you know, stressor
or having to piece things together on your
part.
Those meal plans are using six meals a day.
But again, if you want to consume fewer meals,
you can just condense them down, if you want
to eat four meals that's fine, three meals,
even if you want to eat two meals, theoretically
that's fine.
So, again, thanks for watching this video
lesson.
And I'll talk to you again with some more
free tips.