Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today's video I’m going to be addressing
the topic of uneven abs and how to fix it,
if it is even possible to fix at all. A lot
of people do seem to be typing this in and
looking for information on this topic so that’s
what I’m going to be addressing in this
video. So having "uneven abs" could mean a
few different possible things. First, it could
mean that your abs are “staggered” and
are not directly lined up from side to side,
or it could mean that your actual abdominal
muscle development is not proportional either
from top to bottom or side to side, so let’s
cover each one. First off is the issue of
staggered abs. Unfortunately, there really
isn’t anything you can do if your abs are
not directly lined up from side to side. This
is simply the way that your muscles insert
and it is genetically pre-determined right
from the get go. There really are only two
things that you can do with your muscles:
you can make them bigger, or you can make
them smaller. However, you definitely can't
change their shape, insertions or the way
that they line up. The abdominals are no different,
and if you have staggered abs from side to
side then that’s really just the way it
is. Secondly is imbalanced ab development
from top to bottom. So if your issue here
is a result of imbalanced development between
your upper and lower abs, then this is definitely
something that you do have control over. However,
this problem is almost never an issue related
to the actual abdominal muscles themselves,
and usually it’s a simple matter of body
fat distribution. While direct abdominal training
is certainly an important part of achieving
a defined six pack, a far more important factor
is your bottom line body fat percentage. The
lower your body fat is, the more ripped and
separated your abs are going to appear. Because
of evolutionary reasons, our bodies are more
primed for fat storage on the lower half of
our abdominal wall and this is why lower ab
fat seems so “stubborn” and why it’s
always the last place where fat is burned
from. So if you feel like you have uneven
abs from top to bottom, it’s usually due
to the simple fact that you’re storing more
body fat on your lower abs in comparison to
your upper abs. This causes the upper half
to appear more developed and separated, and
because of that, the simple solution here
is to focus on lowering your overall body
fat percentage until the lower half becomes
more visible. As your overall body fat percentage
continues to drop, that lower ab fat will
drop with it and your abs will appear balanced
and fully developed from top to bottom. And
finally is the issue of imbalanced ab development
from side to side, now this one is a bit more
complicated because it can be due to a variety
of issues. First off, it could be due to improper
form that is causing one side to take on more
of the load than the other. In this case the
solution is to ensure that all of your abdominal
exercises are being executed properly and
that you're not allowing the stronger side
to compensate for the weaker side. And secondly,
it could be due to structural issues in your
body, and this could either be a natural structural
issue (such as one leg being longer than the
other) or issues that have developed over
time due to poor posture or injury. If the
problem is due to a natural structural issue,
then the best thing you can do is to perform
unilateral work where each side of your body
works independently of the other, and this
will prevent one side from compensating for
the other. Some examples of this would be
single-leg leg raises, single-leg knee raises
or one arm planks. If the problem is a result
of poor posture or injury, then that is a
whole other complex issue and you’d need
to have yourself professionally assessed in
that situation. Correcting structural imbalances
is beyond the scope of this video as it could
be the result of a huge number of possible
issues. So just to recap. Number 1, if your
abs are “staggered” from side to side
then this is simply a matter of genetics and
there is really nothing that you can do about
it. Number 2, if your abs are imbalanced from
top to bottom then it’s almost always an
issue of greater body fat storage on the lower
half, in which case you just need to focus
on lowering your overall body fat percentage
to correct this. And number 3, if your ab
development is imbalanced from side to side,
focus on executing your ab movements with
proper form so that one side is not compensating
for the other and include some unilateral
work in your plan, and if it is a postural
issue, then go get yourself checked out by
a professional. So thanks for watching this
for watching this video lesson. I hope you
found the information useful here today. If
you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos. Also make sure to check out
my complete step-by-step muscle building and
fat loss programs over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates. Talk to you again
soon.