What’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, SeanNal.com.
And today’s question is what is the best
time of day to work out?
So, does it actually make any real difference
when you schedule your sessions?
And is workout timing something that you should
be taking into account as part of your training
routine?
So, the answer to this question is not black
and white, no surprise there.
But what I will do is give you a few bits
of information to work with along with my
overall recommendation on the subject.
So, from a pure physical perspective, there
technically is a best time to work out during
the day and that’s going to be anywhere
from the late afternoon to around the early
to mid evening time.
The reason for that is because of your body’s
circadian rhythm and because of the way that
your body activates different systems throughout
each 24-hour period.
So, assuming you have a relatively normal
sleeping and waking schedule, somewhere around
2 to 3 pm to about 8 or 9 pm that’s going
to be the window of time when your core temperature
will be in the optimum range.
You’ll have increased activation in blood
flow in your muscles.
Your joints and connective tissues will be
a bit less susceptible to injury.
And you’ll have the fastest reaction times
as well.
So, in terms of raw physical performance,
all things equal.
That technically would be the best time of
day to work out if you are wanting to fully
maximize your results.
Now, that said, that doesn’t mean that training
earlier on is necessarily a worse option because
there are going to be several other factors
that come into play.
For example, your body might be physically
less primed for maximum performance in the
morning.
But if that’s the time of day when you feel
the most pumped up, the most motivated, and
the most excited to work out, then that mental
aspect alone could offset things and you might
still end up getting better workouts at that
time regardless.
Secondly, keep in mind that willpower tends
to gradually decrease as the day goes on and
as you become more mentally fatigue.
And so, if you work a stressful job for example,
that stress is going to accumulate throughout
the day.
And so, even if your body is physically at
its best to train, let’s say 6 pm, that
mental fatigue could add up and you might
still end up getting a lower quality workout
as a result, or the chances of possibly even
skipping workouts, that might go up as well.
Another thing to take into account is that
training too late at night can also interfere
with sleep.
So, if training at 8 pm gave you a higher
quality workout, it could also mean lower
quality sleep which might negatively impact
your focus and your recovery going into the
next day.
So, those are some possible ways that training
in the morning might actually still be advantageous.
And then you also have to factor in that your
body will tend to adapt its circadian rhythm
to the time of day that you normally work
out.
So, if you consistently train at, say 11 am
over an extended period of time, your body
will start gradually adjusting and physically
priming you for that specific time of day.
And then on top of that there’s also data
showing that if you train early in the morning
but you use caffeine as a pre-workout that
can give your body the extra kick it needs
to perform almost at the same level as it
would in the late afternoon or the evening.
So, based on all of the different little factors
that can come into play, my basic advice on
this topic would be the following; So first
off, if you have no real preference at all
then any time of day is equally convenient
for you to train and you’re wanting to fully
optimize your progress in the gym, then in
that case scheduling your workouts somewhere
within that late afternoon to evening range
is most likely going to be your best option
because that technically is the best time
of day to work out for the very best physical
performance.
Assuming you aren’t working a highly physically
stressful job and then training right after.
If you do work a very stressful job, then
training at lunch time or in the morning is
probably going to be a better option.
Now, that said, if you really prefer training
earlier in the morning because you’re the
most motivated at that time or because it
fits your schedule best, then I wouldn’t
suggest that you go out of your way to change
your workout timing unless fitness is your
number one life priority and you’re aware
that switching the timing might only produce
a minor increase in results in the overall
picture.
The motivational aspect might be enough on
its own for you to match the same performance
that you’d have in the evening anyway.
And the other huge factor you have to take
into account is long-term adherence.
Meaning that if you enjoy morning workouts
or if training in the evening just doesn’t
work well with your schedule, then that’s
probably still going to be a better long-term
strategy to train earlier on because there’s
a greater chance that you’ll actually stick
with your program long-term.
So, all in all, working out a bit later in
the day should theoretically produce slightly
higher quality workouts.
But for most average trainees, the best time
of day to workout is simply going to be the
time that feels best for that particular individual
and that is most convenient.
So, thanks for watching guys.
If you found this advice helpful and you want
to get all the tools you need to gain muscle
and lose fat as effectively as possible, the
workouts, the meal plan, the supplement guides
along with one-on-one coaching then you can
grab my complete body transformation blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description.
If you enjoyed the video, as always, make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up-to-date on future
videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching guys and I will see you
in the next video.