Hey guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com and
in this video today I’m answering sort of
a beginner question but it is one that I get
asked very often which is: Should you eat
back the calories burned from exercise?
Now it’s actually kind of a confusing question
to be honest because it really just stems
from a basic misunderstanding of how the fat-burning
process works.
Now this does apply to a muscle growth as
well but almost everybody who asks me this
question usually has fat loss as their main
goal.
If muscle growth is your goal then the same
basic logic applies with the answer that I’ll
be giving but I will be addressing it from
a fat loss perspective.
But the thing to understand here is that fat
loss ultimately just comes down to managing
your total net energy balance in the big picture.
Meaning that at the end of the day or the
end of the week, when you add up all the energy
you consume so the calories that you eat an
all the energy that you expand so all the
calories that you burned at rest and during
exercise.
You need to be in a situation where you’re
expending more energy than you’re taking
in.
if you do that and the amount of your expending
in comparison to what you’re taking in is
large enough then you’re going to lose fat.
Now you can tip that balance in your favor
in two ways: you can eat less food to reduce
your energy intake and you can exercise more
to increase your energy expenditure.
In almost all cases you’re going to be doing
some combination of both.
You’ll be tracking your food intake and
eating a bit less food than you normally do
and you’ll be performing weight training
and cardio session throughout the week as
well.
And the combination of those two, so eating
less and exercising more not going to result
in fat loss.
Now some people, depending on their preference
may go a little further in either direction.
Some people like myself, prefer to cut dietary
calories a bit further and do a bit less cardio.
While others prefer to only reduce their food
intake slightly and then burn more calories
through cardio.
Either one is acceptable though, and it does
create the same basic bottom line result.
But at the end of the day it’s really just
about creating a net calorie deficit by burning
more than you consume in the overall picture.
So there’s really no question of, “Should
I eat back my calories burned from exercise?”,
you simply have a certain daily calorie intake
that you shoot for and you have a certain
amount of exercise that you perform throughout
the week.
And the combination of those two creates an
overall calorie deficit for fat loss.
Again, it’s really just about managing your
calorie intake versus your total calorie burned
in the big pictures.
So the question of eating back exercise calories
it really doesn’t come into play.
Just fine the right balance for yourself between
eating fewer calories and performing additional
exercise until you’re landing somewhere
in that one to two pound per week fat loss
range.
And there’s really nothing more to it than
that.
Yes you can create a larger deficit and lose
fat faster than that but for most people usually
around one to two pounds per week is typically
a good range for maximizing short and long
term adherence, maintain your training performance
and keeping your hunger, your energy levels,
your mood, your libido and other factors in
check.
And again if you’re asking this question
and your main goal is to gain muscle than
the basic logic of everything that I’ve
said here still applies, except that you need
to do the opposite and consume more calories
than you burn.
And on top of that your total weight change
should be closer to around half a pound per
week gain rather than the one to two pound
per week loss that I previously outlined.
So I hope that answer the question.
Again, it really basic but one that I do get
asked a lot.
If you want to grab a fully structured step-by-step
plan that shows you how to combine proper
nutrition with an effective training plan
to maximize fat loss or muscle growth, then
you can grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description.
You can follow me on social media.
Again the links are below.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, comment and subscribe if
you did find the advice helpful.
Thanks for watching guys and I’ll talk to
you again soon.