Hey, Guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and the question being answered today: Is
creatine safe for teens?
So, I get this a lot from teenagers who are
getting into bodybuilding or who plays sports
competitively and also from the parents of
those teenagers who are wondering about this
topic.
Creatine can be useful for producing small
increase in training performance either in
the weight room or during explosive stop/start
sports, and it also has effects on increasing
intramuscular water weight which can give
you a slightly fuller appearance if you are
someone who responds well to it.
So, is creatine safe for teenagers; the simple
and short answer from a pure physical perspective
is that there is no specific difference from
a physiological stand point between someone
supplementing with creatine at the age of
sixteen or at the age of sixty.
It doesn’t affect hormone levels so there’s
no particular reason why a creatine supplementation
would be any less safe for a teenager versus
someone who is older.
We obviously can’t say anything with a hundred
percent certainty when it comes to nutrition
or supplementation but creatine is the most
researched sport supplement available and
the data basically shows that when used properly
creatine monohydrate is safe for use in otherwise
healthy people.
So, the safety really isn’t the problem,
the only problem comes in when you have a
teenager who hasn’t educated themselves
when it comes to proper training or nutrition
isn’t following a consistent properly structured
program and is looking for supplements for
some kind of quick fix to put on muscle.
I get these messages all the time where a
teenager will say something like, you know,
“I want to put on a quick five or ten pounds,
which protein powder and which creatine supplement
should I use?”
In those cases, I most definitely don’t
recommend using creatine because supplements
are nowhere near being a quick fix.
The results are only going to be modest even
if you are training and eating properly, and
just using them on their own without a proper
program in place that’s literally going
to do nothing at all for you.
So if you’re a teenager who wants to get
in shape and you’re just staring out, supplements
should be the last thing on your mind.
You’re not going to get something for nothing
and building muscle really is a lengthy process
that requires a lot of time and effort and
patience, and your focus needs to be on doing
the proper research first, mapping out a plan
for yourself and then developing the discipline
and the work ethic to stick to that plan in
long term.
And if you’re not willing to do that then
you can forget about building an impressive
body altogether because it’s really just
not going to happen.
Now, if you are teenager who is serious about
this and you’re putting in the time in the
gym, you’re tracking your workouts, you’re
tracking your progress, you have solid nutrition
habits in place and you understand that supplements
are only going to give you a small extra boost
at best, then in that case I really don’t
see any problem with giving creatine a try
as long as you have a few extra bucks to spend
on it.
There are a lot of teens out there who trained
hard, who are patience, who are disciplined.
I know plenty of younger guys out there who
are more motivated and harder working than
guys twice their age, and so if this describes
you then I don’t see any issue with it.
I personally train very hard in my teens.
I was actually more serious about it back
then than I am now and I used a few basic
supplements at that time, and creatine was
one of them.
So, yeah, in that case it’s fine.
And I highly recommend checking out my creatine
supplementation guide, which you can find
over on my website and I’ll link it here
and also in the description box as well.
Make sure to read through that because it
will show you how to use creatine properly
step-by-step and in the most cost effective
way.
Also keep in mind that anywhere between 10-30%
of the population are known as creatine non-responders,
so if you do use it and you don’t notice
any benefits at all after about 2-3 weeks,
no increase in bodyweight and no increase
in strength then you’re probably a non-responder
and you can stop using it and safe your money.
So, that’s really all there is to it.
Is creatine safe for teens?
From a physical standpoint, yes, but I would
only recommend it if you’re serious about
your fitness plan, you’re implementing it
with a consistency and you understand the
role that supplements play in your program,
which is only a very small one overall.
So, I hope this was helpful.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
You can follow me on social media here.
The links are in the description.
If you want to grab a fully structured step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss system that covers
everything you need to know in terms of training,
nutrition and supplementation then you grab
my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
And if you enjoyed the video, as always make
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.