Hey, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
I got a question recently over on my Facebook
page which you can join using the link in
the description box if you haven’t already.
And the question was in regards to “detox
diets”, they’re also called the “cleanses”
and whether or not they are actually of any
use.
This is actually a huge industry now.
If you go down to your local supplement store
or health food store, you’ll see tons of
products in this category.
You know, detox kits, teas, pills, powders,
recipe books and the basic claim is that these
products are going to help you cleanse your
body and cleanse your organs by removing toxins
that have built up in your system.
The reality is that this is complete bullshit.
There is no scientific evidence to show that
detoxes or cleanses done through your diet
or by using supplements.
No evidence to show that they have any effect
on removing toxins from your system.
And there’s also no specific agreed on definition
of what these toxins actually are in the first
place.
In medical terms, detoxification means to
remove a harmful substance from your body.
So that could be alcohol, it could be drugs,
poison and this is done in a hospital using
proper medical procedures.
But when it comes to detox diets and cleanses,
you’ll never actually see a proper explanation
about which toxins are being removed and you
won’t find any scientific information on
how the product actually goes about removing
them.
And that’s because this stuff is basically
just snake oil.
It’s either that or it’s just misinformation
put out on health blogs or YouTube channels
by people who don’t really know what they’re
talking about.
And I’ll actually linked in the description
box below a paper that was done in 2009 that
looked at 15 different companies selling detox
products and it found that no two companies
out of the 15 gave the same definition of
what detoxing actually meant, and none of
them could give any scientific evidence to
support how their products worked.
Now, this doesn’t mean that detoxification
isn’t an important of staying alive and
healthy.
It’s crucially important.
But the way that you do that is pretty simple
and that’s by having a liver, and having
kidneys, and lungs, and skin, and there are
other organs that assist as well but your
body is already wired up and programmed to
flush out waste products that it needs to
get rid of.
And drinking a citrus green tea, detox smoothie,
or following a 5-day apple cucumber juice
plans; that’s not going to help the process.
Assuming that you’re otherwise healthy,
this all gets done on its own.
Now, that doesn’t mean that you can’t
support your body and support your organs
for proper functioning, you can and should
do that by eating a healthy nutrient dense
diet, exercising regularly, getting proper
sleep, not drinking or smoking excessively,
things like that.
But beyond that detox diets and cleansing
supplements are really just a waste of money.
You will hear people that follow some special
detoxification diet and swear by it because
they lost weight or they felt better after
it was done, but that has nothing whatsoever
to do with the removal of toxins.
Most of these cleansing diets are very low
calorie because they’re usually based on
consuming a lot of fruits and vegetables,
and that’s going to cause you to lose weight
fairly quickly but it’s basically just water
and glycogen loss.
And as soon as you go back to eating your
regular diet, most of that weight is just
going to come right back.
And if you felt better, again it’s not because
you were removing toxins but if you were eating
a high calorie intake before and you were
consuming, you know, large amounts of processed
foods and the you go ahead and do one of these
cleanses and you reduce you calories intake,
and you start eating a lot of fruits and vegetables
and drinking more water, yeah, you’re going
to feel better.
Because your mood and energy levels are going
to go up because you’re now getting the
micro nutrients that your previous diet might
have been lacking.
And then on top of that is the basic placebo
effect, which is also extremely powerful where
if a person really believes that a certain
supplement or a diet is going to have a particular
effect, then they really will feel like it’s
working even if it’s not having any actual
benefit in their body.
You know, if you have the mindset that, “My
body was filled with toxins and now I’m
purified, and I’m toxin free.”
Then, yeah, you’re going to be in a mental
state because of that.
But anyway, there’s not much else to say
on this.
Don’t fall for the stuff.
It’s pseudoscience.
There’s no evidence for it and your body
already knows how to detoxify itself all on
its own.
Thanks for watching guys.
If you appreciate science based, no BS information
when it comes to nutrition and exercise, then
you can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
You can grab my step-by-step Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here, or by heading
over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com using
the link in the description.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe t stay up to date.
See you in the next video.