Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here,BodyTransformationTruth.com,
with the first installment of a new Q&A series
that I’ll be doing over the next several
weeks.
I’ve put out quite a bit of content over
the last few years, I think there’s over
250 videos on this channel now, and since
new subscribers join the channel every day
and because there are so many individual points
that I’ve gone over in all of my previous
videos, I just wanted to use this Q&A series
to sort of go back and summarize a lot of
the more popular topics that I’ve covered.
Those of you who follow my content on a regular
basis know that I tend to be pretty thorough
with each video that I put out, and so with
this Q&A series, I’m just going to try to
provide concise, straight to the point answers
and give you just more simple tidbits of information
that you can directly take and apply to your
program.
I’ll be doing probably 5 questions per video
and probably 12-15 videos in total over the
next several weeks.
So, let’s get started.
Question number 1 is, in terms of exercise
selection, what is the best approach for maximizing
hypertrophy of the pecs.
So in my view, the best overall lift for increasing
chest size would be a basicdumbbell press
performed at a flat or decline angle.
Compared to barbell presses and most machine
presses, dumbbells are going to allow you
to train tyour chest through a larger range
of motion and the also prevent strength imbalances
and shoulder injuries by allowing each arm
to move independently and in a more natural
arching motion.
And the flat or decline angle is going to
be the best choice because it places the resistance
in line with the lower sternocostal fibers
of the pec and that's the area where the majority
of the mass is located.
The upper chest should still be given some
direct attention as well to make sure that
you're getting full stimulation of your entire
chest area, and an incline dumbbell press
will be the most effective lift to target
that portion.
And finally, you can include a fly movement
to just round out your chest workout and to
really isolate your pecs with minimal involvement
of your front delts and triceps.
Cable flys are going to be your best bet there,
because they provide consistent tension on
your chest throughout the entire range of
motion, whereas dumbbell flys only hit your
chest to a significant degree in the lower
and mid portion of the range because of the
direction that gravity is pulling the resistance.
So I’d recommend performing your cable flys
at adecline angle, and that can be done either
standing (so pulling the cables from a high
to low angle) or done on a decline bench that
you position inside of a cable stand.
So, there are obviously a ton of different
ways that you could go about effectively training
your chest, but the standard exercise sequence
that I recommend is a flat or decline dumbbell
press followed by an incline dumbbell press,
and followed by a decline cable fly.
Question #2, are weight gainer shakes a good
choice for naturally thin guys who are looking
to bulk up?
The truth here is that most standard commercial
weight gain powders are really nothing special
and they're usually just a basic mix of whey
protein and simple sugar (usually maltodextrin).
So these shakes are high calorie, but they
really don’t provide much in the way of
vitamins, minerals, fiber and other micronutrients.
So if you find that you have a small appetite
or the convenience of having a pre-made powder
to take with you on the go is of particular
benefit to you, then a weight gain powder
can be an acceptable option as long as it’s
treated only as a supplemental source and
as long as itonly makes up a relatively small
portion of your total calorie intake for the
day.
However, if you have a few extra minutes on
your hands and if youhave access to a blender
and a few basic ingredients, then a homemade
high-calorie shake is going to be a far better
option.
Go with whey as the protein source and then
just blend it along with your own whole-food
carbohydrates (so things like fruit or oats
or yogurt) and some healthy fats as well (such
as natural nut butters or healthy oils), and
by doing that you can still get a high calorie
shake but in a far more nutritious and better-tasting
way.
Question #3, does performing cardio on an
empty stomach burn fat more effectively in
comparison to having a meal first?
So based on the available evidence, I strongly
doubt that going the “fasted cardio” route
is going to be of any measurable benefit for
improving fat loss, and it might actually
have some potentially negative effects as
well.
Fasted cardio does increase lipolysis (which
is the amount of fat that is broken down),
but it doesn’t actually increase fat oxidation
(which is the amount of fat that is burned).
So in other words, fasted cardio causes your
body to break down more fat than it can actually
use for energy.
And when it comes to fat loss, the limiting
factor is fat oxidation, and NOT fat lipolysis,
and in the end, the fatty acids that aren’t
used for fuel are simply going to be re-stored
as body fat.
Most people way over-simplify how the body’s
energy systems work, and it’s far more complicated
than the simple logic of “no food in the
stomach means that fat is burned for energy”
while “having food in the stomach means
that carbohydrates are burned for energy”.
Although the overall difference will probably
be marginal either way, fasted cardio can
actually have some potentially negative effects
as well, including increased chances for muscle
loss as well as decreased overall workout
performance.
Question #4, what’s the deal when it comes
to leg extensions?
Some people say that they are a useful quad
building exercise, while other people say
thatthey’re worthless for building muscle
and are hard on the knees.
Personally I would put leg extensions in the
“optional” category, and even though they're
definitely not an essential quad exercise,
they can be useful in 3 main situations.
The first is if you want to include some additional
volume for your quads but you’re already
very physically or mentally fatigued from
your heavy compound lifts like your squats
and your leg presses.
The second is going to be if you have lower
back issues and you need a quad exercise that
doesn’t stress that area.
And the third is going to be if you want to
perform some high rep work for your quads
but you find that your cardiovascular system
becomes the limiting factor on bigger compound
quad movements.
So if you have otherwise healthy knees and
you don’t experience any discomfort when
you perform leg extensions, then I don’t
think that they're going to pose a significant
risk as long as you make sure to adjust the
machine properly to your individual body structure,
make sure to execute each rep using a slow
and controlled cadence, and stick to higher
reps and focus on very gradually increasing
the weight over time.
And question #5 is what is the ideal resting
time in between sets if your goal is to maximize
muscle hypertrophy?
So I’ve never really been a fan of having
set rest periods in between sets for the very
simple reason that it’s highly variable
and it totally depends on which exercise you're
performing as well as how intensely you're
performing that specific set.
Training all the way to complete muscular
failure would obviously increase your need
for rest in between sets in comparison to
training a couple reps short of failure, and
on top of that performing a big compound exercise
in comparison to a smaller isolation exercise
that would also increase your need for rest
as well.
A moderate intensity set of tricep extensions
might only require maybe 45 seconds of rest
for full recovery, whereas a high intensity
set of say squats or deadlifts might have
you resting maybe 3 minutes or more.
So the very simple answer I would give here
is that you should just listen to your body
and you should only perform your next set
once you feel fully recovered from the previous
one and once you have 100% of your available
physical and mental strength back intact.
If your central aim in the gym is to build
muscle size as effectively as possible, then
your basic goal should be to move maximum
weight for maximum reps on each set (obviously
using proper form and within your targeted
rep range), and if you intentionally short-circuit
your rest periods before you’ve had the
chance to properly recover, all you're going
to be doing is minimizing the total amount
of muscular overload that you can achieve
on the subsequent set.
Just make sure that you aren’t resting any
more than you truly need to in order to make
sure that you're able to move through your
workout as efficiently as possible.
So thanks for watching this Q&A lesson, I
hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn everything you need to
know to structure an optimal muscle building
or fat burning plan based on your individual
goals, your body type and your lifestyle,
make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.