What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodytransforamtionTruth.com
in this video here I wanted to spill a very
common myth that you’ll see floating around
in the fitness industry, which is the idea
of foods that burns fat.
So you’ve probably seen articles and videos
like this floating around, you know “The
8 Best Fat Burning Foods” or “5 Foods
That Burn Fat Fast”, and depending on how
you interpret the idea of a fat burning food,
it’s either a completely false concept or
there’s some truth to it but only a little
bit.
So let’s take a look at both scenarios.
So, the first is the literal idea of fat burning
food; and these are the one that you’ll
see on ads and in general weight loss articles
where they basically implied that is you add
a particular food into your diet that you’ll
actually burn more fat as a result.
And this could be because the food supposedly
boost your fat burning hormone levels or increases
your metabolism or whatever else, and this
is totally false.
And for people who are totally new to fitness
and proper nutrition, it’s actually a really
dangerous concept that does a lot more harm
than good.
It is true that when you eat a particular
food your body has to expand a certain number
of calories to extract the total calories
from that food.
This is called the thermic effect of food
or TEF.
However, the overall result is going to be
a positive net increased in your calorie intake.
There’s no such thing as a negative calorie
food or a free food that you can just eat
in unlimited quantities.
Anything that you consume that contains calories
will add to your calorie intake.
So in that sense the idea of a fat burning
food is basically an oxymoron and adding a
particular food to your diet on top of what
you’re already eating is never going to
result in more fat loss for the day as a whole.
And this is why articles that talked about
this are dangerous because they’ll tell
people that, you know, avocado is a fat burning
food or coconut oil or chocolate are fat burning
foods and then people think, “Okay, great,
I can add some avocado or some dark chocolate
to my diet and I’m going to get better overall
results.”
When in reality a lot of these so called fat
loss foods are actually extremely calorie
densed, and the number of calories that you
end up storing hugely outweighs what your
body burns to digest them.
Yes, obviously some foods have lower calorie
density in comparison to the total volume
that they provide, vegetables are a good examples
of that.
And so including those foods in your diet
is a helpful way to keep yourself feeling
full without adding a lot of calories, but
they still do add calories to your diet.
And usually you won’t be eating them plain
anyway, and so whatever else you add to those
foods also contributes to your calorie intake.
Now, unless you’re a complete beginner then
I’m sure most of you were aware of that
already, but I did mention that there was
some truth to this concept and that’s because
different macro nutrients have higher or lower
thermic effects.
So certain foods do require more calorie output
to digest them in comparison to other foods.
Now, there’s no universally agreed on figures
here, so these are just ballpark estimates
but dietary fat has the lowest TEF at about
3-5% , carbohydrates are around 5-15% and
protein is the highest at about 20-30%, and
fiber is also about the same as protein.
So in other words of you ate a hundred calories
worth of fat, your body would expand, maybe
5 calories in order to extract those hundred
calories and so the net results would be 95
calories.
Whereas if you ate a hundred calories worth
of protein, your body might expand, say 25
calories, and so the net result might be 75
calories.
So in that sense the idea of fat burning foods,
sort of make sense but only in terms of comparing
one food item that has a lower thermic effect
and with the same number of total calories
as another food item that has a higher thermic
effect.
So, for example, a can of tuna could be looked
at as more of a fat burning food than one
and a half table spoons of olive oil because
even though they both have the same calorie
content your body has to expand more energy
to extract the calories from the tuna.
Now some people will hear this sort of thing
and then think, “Okay, I’m just going
to eat nothing but high protein and high fiber
foods, and that way I’ll maximize TEF and
I’ll lose more fat.”
It’s obviously not that simple though, and
there’s a couple important things to keep
in mind.
First off, even though dietary fat has a very
low thermic effect you still need a certain
amount of dietary fat for health reasons,
like proper brain function and keeping hormone
levels in check.
So, really low fat diets are basically never
a good idea to begin with, not to mention
that they will cause your appetites to go
way up.
Secondly, most people generally won’t be
best off on a low carb diet.
For some people it works, but for the majority
a low carb diet will caused low energy and
lower mental focus among other things, which
can negatively affect your training performance
and your motivation levels.
And then thirdly, TEF only makes up a small
percentage of your total calorie burn for
the day anyway, usually about 10%, and so
it doesn’t really make any sense to try
and structure your diet around maximizing
the thermic effect as opposed to just making
sure that you’re maintaining a calorie deficit
and consuming a good balanced mix of macro
nutrients.
I already recommend that you consume around
0.8 to 1 gram of protein per pound of body
weight daily.
I recommend that you do include high fiber
foods like vegetables in order to fill yourself
up and meet your micro nutrient needs.
And so you’re going to get decent thermic
effect from that already, and you’re going
to do that while keeping your appetite controlled.
So I really wouldn’t worry much about TEF
beyond that.
Like I’ve said a million times before, fat
loss is about maintaining a calorie deficit
overtime through a balanced macro nutrient
intake.
And it’s not about only eating certain food
items and avoiding other ones.
There’s no such thing as fat burning foods
or fat storing foods, there’s only such
a thing as a fat burning diet or a fat storing
diet.
And that’s going to be primarily dictated
by overall energy balance.
So thanks for watching guys.
If you appreciate science based, no BS information
when it comes to training and nutrition then
you can grab my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here, or by heading over to www.BodyTransformatonTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
That program shows you everything you need
to know to lose fat and to gain muscle effectively
in a simple step-by-step format.
You can follow me on social media here if
you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
don’t forget to like, comment and subscribe
if you did find the information helpful.
Thanks for watching guys and I’ll see you
in the next video.