Dude, I love full body workouts, 
they're amazing for hypertrophy.
Nonsense,  
everyone knows full body workouts are for newbs. 
Bro-splits are where the real gains are at, bro.
Ha! Bro-splits are for 
juice heads, you juice head.
I like push/pull/legs.
In this video, we're going extremely 
deep into the science comparing  
different training frequencies 
and splits for muscle hypertrophy.
Briefly, full-body workouts, needless to 
say, involve training all muscle groups  
in one session. Anywhere from 2 to 5 full-body 
training sessions are commonly performed per week.
Bro-splits isolate muscle groups 
on different days of the week.  
Muscle groups are typically trained with 
a frequency of once or twice a week here.
Upper/lower splits train your upper and 
lower body muscles on separate days.  
Commonly, 2 upper and lower body 
sessions are performed weekly,  
resulting in you training muscle 
groups at a twice per week frequency.
Though performing 3 upper and lower body 
sessions each week is also possible,  
this results in you training your muscle 
groups with a three times per week frequency.
Finally, push/pull/legs train your pushing, 
pulling, and leg muscles on separate days.  
Such a schedule means muscle groups are 
hit with a frequency of twice per week.
Before diving into the science, let us 
overview some history of training splits.
If you do not care about the history, 
feel free to skip to the timepoint shown  
on screen where we begin examining 
the training frequency research.
Traveling back to the 1900s to 1950s,  
surprisingly, full-body 
training seemed to be the norm.
It appears Eugen Sandow, often called “the 
father of bodybuilding”, and other legends  
within the sport, like Reg Park (an idol of 
Arnold), trained with full-body routines.
For example, I stumbled across a newspaper 
article written by Reg Park himself,  
detailing his training preparation 
for the 1958 Mr. Universe competition.
Part of this prep consisted of 
3 full-body weekly workouts.
By the 1950s-60s and onwards, however, the rise 
of bro-splits was ignited for a couple of reasons.
Firstly, it appears the Weider brothers, 
businessmen with their own supplements,  
magazines, and bodybuilding competitions, 
are credited with popularising bro-splits  
through their magazine's writings. Partly, 
it seems the Weider brother's promotion of  
bro splits was to help distinguish themselves 
from other businessmen in the fitness world.
Secondly, while evidence exists of occasional 
bodybuilding competitions before the 1930s,  
it was in the decades after bodybuilding 
competitions become more regular and prominent.  
As an article by BarBend puts it “If 
no bodybuilding competitions exist,  
focusing on your biceps peaks 
seems somewhat pointless.”  
Thus, the rise of regular and prominent 
bodybuilding competitions likely also  
contributed to bro-splits becoming more favorably 
looked upon by bodybuilding enthusiasts.
Thirdly and finally, during what’s now sometimes 
called the “golden era of bodybuilding”,  
legendary figures like Arnold and Frank Zane 
were known to train and promote bro splits.
In Arnold’s encyclopedia of 
bodybuilding, published in 1985,  
bro-split routines were detailed.
Back to today, the popularity of bro-splits 
seems to remain in the bodybuilding sphere.
A 2022 study by Hackett et al. had 235 competitive 
bodybuilders complete an online survey,  
and found 85.5% of them used split routines.
It may be worth also noting 53.6% of all surveyed 
bodybuilders used performance-enhancing drugs.
With regards to upper/lower 
splits and push/pull/leg splits,  
I was unfortunately unable to find 
any resources detailing their history.
Nevertheless, let us transition 
to examining what the research  
has to say on the optimal training 
frequency for muscle hypertrophy.
It's very important to note all the 
research to be explored has assessed  
how different training frequencies 
impact muscle growth while all other  
weekly training variables (including weekly 
sets per muscle group) are kept the same.
For example, researchers may get one group 
to train their muscle groups once per week  
and compare this to another group of subjects 
training their muscle groups three times per week.
Both of these groups ultimately perform 
the same weekly sets on the same exercises  
and thus achieve the same weekly 
set numbers per muscle group.
Keeping all other weekly training variables 
the same ensures they do not confound our  
findings, as we're trying to isolate the 
effect of training frequencies and splits.
This is important, as the number of 
weekly sets per muscle group performed can  
impact the amount of hypertrophy produced.
Nevertheless, some individuals believe in 
the real world, higher training frequencies  
are a practical way to increase the number 
of weekly sets performed per muscle group.  
This is a fair point, and it's something 
we'll address a little later on.
With that out the way, let's 
get on to the literature.
In 2016, a meta-analysis by Schoenfeld 
et al. combined the results of all the  
existing studies at that time 
point on training frequency.
It was found with all other weekly training 
variables equal, training a muscle group twice  
per week was better than once a week. Due 
to limited data, the researchers couldn't  
speculate on if training a muscle group three 
or more times per week provided more benefit.
To this day, many people seem to run 
with this data saying bro-splits are  
scientifically inferior, as bro-splits typically 
involve training a muscle group once a per week.
Full-body workouts, upper/lower splits, and 
push/pull/legs splits were thought to be superior  
as all these involve training a muscle group 
at a frequency of two or more times per week.
You might have come across numerous 
Instagram posts expressing these very ideas.
Yet, there are major problems here.  
This analysis was conducted 6 years 
ago and only involved 7 studies.
Fortunately, Schoenfeld et al. conducted 
an updated meta-analysis in 2019.  
This is currently the most up to data official  
meta-analysis examining training 
frequency and muscle hypertrophy.
13 studies were included in 
the analysis this time around.
It was found with all other weekly 
training variables constant,  
training frequency did not affect muscle growth.  
That is, no particular training frequency 
was superior for muscle hypertrophy.
An important point is out 
of the 13 studies included,  
11 had subjects train with a total of 12 
weekly sets per muscle group or fewer.
Thus, the most accurate conclusion from this 
analysis is when training with a total of 12 or  
fewer weekly sets per muscle group, no particular 
training frequency or split seems to be superior.
Bro splits, full-body workouts, upper/lower 
splits, and push/pull/legs splits are all viable.
Let's briefly examine a few studies included 
in the analysis underscoring this point.
Gomes et al. recruited 23 trained men with 
an average bench press one-rep max of 103kg  
and an average squat one-rep max of 132kg.
One group used bro-splits that trained muscle 
groups at a frequency of once per week.
A second group used full-body 
workouts that trained muscle  
groups at a frequency of five times per week.
Both groups accumulated 10 weekly 
sets for each trained muscle group.
Although, with the triceps and biceps, if you 
count compound exercises in addition to the  
isolation exercises, both these muscles 
were trained with 15 weekly sets each.
Nevertheless, after 8 weeks of training, increases 
in lean mass were similar between both groups.
Another study by Ochi et al. 
recruited untrained subjects  
and had them train the leg extension only.
One group performed 6 sets on one day per week.  
Another group performed 2 
sets across 3 days per week.
After 11 weeks of training,  
increases in quadriceps thickness 
were similar between both groups.
Therefore, this study potentially 
suggests with low weekly set numbers,  
training a muscle once a week (as done with 
bro-splits) may be similarly effective to  
training a muscle three times per week 
(as done with full-body workouts).
Regarding upper/lower and push/pull/legs 
splits, we know these typically train a  
muscle at a frequency of twice per week. Again, 
with 12 or fewer weekly sets per muscle group,  
there is likely nothing superior or 
inferior with a twice per week frequency.
As an example, Yue et al. recruited 18 trained men 
with an average bench press one-rep max of 77kg  
and an average squat one-rep max of 103kg.
One group trained their muscle groups 
with a frequency of once per week  
(except the triceps and biceps which 
were technically trained twice per week),  
while another group trained their muscle 
groups with a frequency of twice per week  
(except the biceps and triceps which were 
technically trained four times per week).
Both groups trained all muscle 
groups with 4-12 weekly sets.  
However, if you count compound exercise sets 
toward triceps and biceps weekly set numbers,  
the biceps were trained with 16 weekly sets while 
the triceps were trained with 24 weekly sets.
After 6 weeks of training, both 
groups did not statistically  
differ in vastus medialis and 
elbow flexor thickness gains.
So, it seems when performing 12 
weekly sets per muscle group or fewer,  
all training splits and frequencies appear viable 
and similarly effective for building muscle.
The burning question is what about when training 
with more than 12 weekly sets per muscle group?
Does training frequency matter in this situation?
Theoretically, there could be a limit to the 
number of effective sets you can perform for a  
muscle group per session. Thus, when training a 
muscle group with a fair number of weekly sets,  
using a training frequency greater 
than once per week may be required
Indeed, two studies published in 2020 by Barbalho 
et al. provided potential evidence for this.
Both studies were designed the same,  
but one study was done on trained 
men while the other on trained women.
Subjects only trained their muscle 
groups at a frequency of once per week.
One group trained with 5 
weekly sets per muscle group,  
the second with 10 weekly sets, the third with 15 
weekly sets, and the fourth with 20 weekly sets.
As subjects trained muscle groups 
with a frequency of once per week,  
the number of weekly sets performed 
for a muscle group was equivalent  
to the number of sets performed 
for a muscle group per session.
Overall, 5 to 10 sets were sufficient 
for increasing muscle size. In fact,  
the data of the study shows slightly worse muscle 
size increases when training with 15 to 20 sets.
Hence, this data potentially indicates 
on a per session basis (as remember,  
the study used a frequency of once per 
week), performing between 5 to 10 sets  
per muscle group might be the limit to the amount 
of productive volume you can perform per session.
If you want to perform more than 
5-10 weekly sets for a muscle group,  
distributing the weekly sets across a 
higher frequency of days may be necessary.
However, we have a problem.
These two studies by Barbalho et 
al. have since been retracted,  
probably because the data presented 
in the study was not legitimate.
It's been established many studies 
conducted by Barbalho et al. contain  
atypical and improbable data.
So, these Barbalho studies cannot 
help our quest to establish the  
optimal training frequency 
with higher weekly volumes.
Fortunately, we do have other valid data.
Recall in the Schoenfeld et al. 2019 
meta-analysis, 11 of the 13 included  
studies in the analysis had subjects train 
with 12 or fewer weekly sets per muscle group.
Meaning 2 studies had subjects train with 
more than 12 weekly sets per muscle group.
Moreover, since 2019, 3 additional studies 
have been published comparing different  
training frequencies when subjects train with 
more than 12 weekly sets per muscle group.
So in total, we currently have 5 studies.
Allow us to overview them.
Evangelista et al. recruited untrained men with  
an average 60kg bench press one-rep 
max and an average 87kg back squat.  
These numbers, particularly the squat numbers, 
are quite impressive for untrained individuals.
Anyway, a bro-split routine group trained their 
muscle groups at a twice per week frequency,  
while a full-body group trained muscle 
groups at a four times per week frequency.
Both groups accumulated 16 
weekly sets per muscle group
However, if we include compound exercise sets 
towards the weekly set biceps and triceps counts,  
the triceps were trained with 
a whooping 40-48 weekly sets,  
while the biceps were trained with 32 weekly sets.
Now, although both groups performed the same 
weekly set numbers for their muscle groups  
(except for the triceps), exercise selection 
slightly differed between the bro split and  
full-body groups. The bro split group 
used a little more exercise variety.
Nonetheless, after 8 weeks of training, 
increases in quadriceps, triceps,  
and biceps thickness were similar between 
both the bro-split and full-body groups.
Suggesting even with higher weekly volumes,  
bro-splits may be comparable 
to full body workouts.
Brigatto et al. also suggest training frequency 
may not matter much with higher weekly volumes.
These researchers recruited trained men whose 
average bench press one-rep max was 94kg  
and squat one-rep max was 125kg.
Two groups trained with a split routine. One group 
trained their muscle groups with a frequency of  
once per week while the second group trained their 
muscle groups with a frequency of twice per week.
Both groups accumulated 16 weekly sets per muscle 
group. Though, if we counted compound exercises  
toward biceps and triceps weekly set counts, both 
these muscles were trained with 24 weekly sets.
After 8 weeks of training, increases 
in triceps, biceps, vastus lateralis,  
and anterior quadriceps thickness 
were similar between both groups.
Suggesting with higher weekly volumes,  
a frequency of once per week may 
be similar to a twice per week.
Thus, combining this Brigatto study with 
the Evangelista study, they potentially  
indicate training splits and frequency may 
not matter with higher weekly volumes either.
However, the remaining three studies 
do not support this conclusion.
Zaroni et al. recruited men with an 
average bench press one-rep max of 99kg  
and an average squat one-rep max of 109kg.
A bro-split group trained their muscle groups at 
a once per week frequency (though the triceps and  
biceps would have been trained twice per 
week if we consider compound exercises).
A full body trained their muscle group 
at a frequency of five times per week.
Both groups accumulated 15 weekly sets for all 
muscle groups. But for the biceps and triceps,  
if we count compound exercises, both these 
muscles were trained with 30 weekly sets.
After 8 weeks of training, 
increases in triceps, biceps,  
and vastus lateralis thickness were superior for 
the full-body group versus the bro-split group.
Indicating with higher weekly volumes, full-body 
training may be superior to bro-splits.
Yet, another study by Bartolomei et al. 
somewhat directly conflicts with this study.
These researchers recruited trained 
men with an average bench press one-rep  
max of 96kg and an average 
squat one-rep max of 108kg.
A bro-split group trained their muscle 
groups at a frequency of once per week.  
Though the triceps, considering compound 
exercises, would have been trained twice per week.
A full-body group trained their muscle group 
at a frequency of three to four times per week.
Both groups accumulated 15 weekly sets for the 
chest and 20 weekly sets for their quadriceps,  
while the trapezius was trained 
with around 25 indirect weekly sets.
After 10 weeks of training,  
increases in thickness of the chest 
were similar between both groups. But,  
increases in thickness of the vastus lateralis and 
trapezius were superior for the bro-split group.
Suggesting bro-splits overall to be superior to 
full body training with higher weekly volumes,  
thus somewhat conflicting 
with the Zaroni et al. study.
Making things even more confusing, we 
have the final study by Lasevicius et al.
These researchers recruited trained men with 
an average bench press one-rep max of 79kg  
and an average back squat one-rep max of 161kg.
An upper/lower split group trained their muscle 
groups with a frequency of twice per week.
A full-body group trained their muscle groups 
with a frequency of three times per week.
Both groups accumulated 36 
weekly sets for the quadriceps,  
and 12 weekly sets for the triceps and biceps. 
However, if we counted compound exercise sets  
towards triceps and biceps weekly sets, both of 
these muscles were trained with 24 weekly sets.
After 10 weeks of training, increases in thickness 
of the rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, biceps,  
and triceps were superior for the upper/lower 
split group versus the full-body group.
Suggesting with high weekly volumes, a 
frequency of twice per week (as achieved  
with upper/lower splits) is more beneficial 
than a frequency of three times per week  
(as achieved with full-body workouts).
When combining all of these 5 studies, it's 
utterly confusing as the findings are conflicting.
2 studies suggest training frequency did not 
impact hypertrophy, 1 suggests full-body workouts  
are superior to bro-splits, another suggests 
bro-splits are superior to full body workouts,  
and the final study indicates upper-lower 
splits are better than full-body workouts.
Needless to say, the 5 studies 
were far from identical.  
The precise training details 
between the studies differed,  
this could go some way toward explaining 
the conflicting results between studies.
At this time, it's going to be 
impossible for us to figure this out.
Even so, individual differences could also go 
some way to explaining the conflicting data,  
and this is a very important point.
There's reason to believe different individuals  
can respond best to different 
training frequencies or splits.
One paper by Damas et al. supports this.
19 untrained men were recruited and had one of 
their legs assigned to a high-frequency condition  
and their other leg assigned 
to a low-frequency condition.
Both legs were trained on the 
unilateral leg extension with  
each session consisting of 3 sets 
of 9-12 repetitions to failure.
With the high-frequency leg, 
subjects did this 5 times per week.  
With the low-frequency leg, subjects 
did the session 2 or 3 times per week.
This design also meant volume was not equated.  
The high-frequency condition would have 
accumulated 15 weekly sets for the quadriceps,  
while the low-frequency condition would have 
accumulated 6 to 9 weekly sets for the quadriceps.
Before and after the 8 weeks of training,  
vastus lateralis cross-sectional 
area was measured for both legs.
6 subjects experienced the best vastus lateralis 
cross-sectional area increases with their  
high-frequency condition leg, 7 experienced the 
highest vastus lateralis cross-sectional area  
increases with their low-frequency condition 
leg, and the remaining 6 saw similar vastus  
lateralis cross-sectional area increases 
between both the high and low-frequency legs.
Based on this, it seems some individuals may grow 
more with higher frequency training, others with  
lower frequency training, and some may display no 
difference between higher and lower frequencies.
Again, the number of weekly sets 
was not equated in this study,  
so this confounds the conclusion just made.
Nevertheless, I think it's quite 
likely different training frequencies  
and splits may work best 
for different individuals.
Moreover, these individual differences may 
be more important when discussing higher  
volumes (namely when people perform more 
than 12 weekly sets per muscle group).
If true, this may explain why the research is more 
consistent in finding when performing 12 or fewer  
weekly sets per muscle group, training frequency 
and splits have no impact on muscle growth.
And it also explains why when performing 
more than 12 weekly sets per muscle group,  
the findings of the 5 studies 
are largely conflicting.
With the 5 studies examining the influence 
of different training frequencies when  
training with more than 12 weekly sets per 
muscle group, a vital consideration exists.
Most of the studies had subjects use 
short rest interval durations between  
sets (1 to 1.5 minutes) in their sessions.
Except for the Bartolomei study, which 
had subjects rest 2 minutes between sets,  
which might potentially be just 
about a long rest interval.
Nevertheless, why is the fact most of the 
studies used short rest intervals important?
It's because short rest intervals make each 
set less effective for building muscle.
A couple of studies demonstrate with all 
other training variables equal, resting  
2.5-3 minutes between sets produces more muscle 
hypertrophy than resting for 1.5 minutes or less.
Now, the studies finding this largely used 
compound exercises, and it is likely this  
conclusion (2.5-3 minutes of rest between sets is 
superior) applies to compound exercises only. Even  
so, we know the 5 studies overviewed 
earlier used numerous compound exercises.
When using short rest intervals 
between compound exercise sets  
(1.5 minutes or less), you likely have to perform 
extra sets to receive similar muscle hypertrophy.
A study by Longo et al. demonstrated this.
When performing 3 sets of 
repetitions to failure per session,  
resting for 3 minutes between 
sets produced greater increases  
in quadriceps cross-sectional area 
versus resting for 1 minute between sets.
But, when performing 4 to 5 sets of repetitions 
to failure with 1-minute rest between sets,  
muscle growth was similar to performing 3 sets of  
repetitions to failure with 3 
minutes of rest between sets.
How does this information 
tie into training frequency?
Earlier we stated there could be a 
limit to the effective number of sets  
you can perform for a muscle group per session.
If true, the limit would likely be LOWER 
when using long rest intervals between sets.  
This is because long rest intervals 
between sets make each set more effective.
The limit would probably be HIGHER when 
using short rest intervals between sets,  
as short rest intervals between sets make 
each set less effective for building muscle.
As most of the 5 studies 
used short rest intervals,  
maybe this explains why many of them found 
bro-splits or lower frequencies to be viable.
As the limit to the number of effective sets for  
a muscle group per session would be 
higher with shorter rest intervals,  
perhaps none of the subjects training with bro 
splits or lower frequencies exceeded this limit.
If the studies used longer rest intervals instead,  
more of them might find bro-splits or 
lower frequencies to be suboptimal.
The subjects' training with bro splits or 
lower frequencies might exceed the limit  
to the number of effective sets that can be 
performed for a muscle group per session,  
as this limit would be lower 
when using long rest intervals.
To rephrase all this, if the studies exploring 
how different training frequencies compare  
when training with more than 12 weekly sets 
per muscle group used longer rest intervals  
(2.5-3 minutes), they may find lower frequencies 
to be inferior as subjects would exceed the limit  
to the number of effective sets that can be 
performed for a muscle group each session.
Of course, this is very much speculation.
But, is there any research that could 
help verify anything we've just said?
There is indeed some potential data.
A study by Ogasawara et al. subjected the 
gastrocnemius of rats to sets of 10 electrically  
induced muscle contractions, using 3 minutes 
of rest between sets (a long rest interval).
They found muscle protein synthesis progressively 
increased up to performing 10 sets of this per  
session. But, muscle protein synthesis was 
less when performing 20 sets per session.
Suggesting anywhere from 10 
to 20 sets may be the limit to  
the number of effective sets that can be 
performed for a muscle group per session.
Of course, limitations of this 
data are rats were studied and  
muscle protein synthesis measurements 
were taken, not actual muscle growth.
Another study by Damas et al., conducted on 
humans, found little difference in myofibrillar  
protein synthesis between training with 8 and 
12 sets for the quadriceps in one session.
2 minutes of rest between sets was used, which 
is probably just about a long rest interval.
Therefore, this study suggests there's 
little benefit to performing more  
than 8 sets for a muscle group per 
session with longer rest intervals.
Again though, this data is limited as 
it only explored protein synthesis,  
not actual muscle growth.
Finally, an analysis by James Kreiger 
examined the current research on set  
numbers and found when resting 2 or 
more minutes between sets, muscle  
growth tended to plateau beyond performing 
6-8 sets for a muscle group per session.
However, a limitation is this analysis included 
studies done on trained and untrained individuals,  
and much of the studies done 
on untrained individuals did  
not exceed 6 sets for a muscle group per session.
So much of the data points on the 
left from untrained individuals may  
bias the curve as untrained individuals 
have greater muscle growth capacity.
Furthermore, it's possible weekly set 
numbers could also confound this analysis.  
Much of the datapoints to the right 
of the graph come from studies having  
subjects perform a high number of 
total weekly sets for a muscle group.
Thus, the lower muscle growth in this area could 
be a result of performing too many weekly sets  
(and perhaps under recovering) rather than  
performing too many sets on 
an individual session basis.
Even so, when combining the Ogasawara 
et al. study, the Damas et al., study,  
and the analysis by James Kreiger, 6-10 sets for 
a muscle group per session might be the limit.
But again, these data have 
their respective limitations.  
Future research is unquestionably 
required to examine things further.
As a final counterpoint, recall the Bartolomei et 
al. study had subjects rest 2 minutes between sets  
(which may just about be a long rest interval),  
yet this study found bro-splits were 
overall superior to full body workouts.
In fact, the bro-split group was performing 
20 sets for the quadriceps in one session.
Thus, this study might oppose 
the suggestions we've made,  
perhaps there's no practical limit to 
the number of effective sets that can be  
performed for muscle group per session. 
But this is only a single study too.
Making things crystal clear so far, we've 
established when training with 12 or fewer  
weekly sets per muscle group, training frequency 
does not seem to impact muscle hypertrophy.
When training with more than 12 weekly sets 
per muscle group, data conflicts on the optimal  
training frequency. Individual differences 
could explain these conflicting findings.
Yet, a limitation with this data is short 
rest intervals were used. If they used  
longer rest intervals, lower frequencies could 
be suboptimal, but this is currently speculative.
Moving on, we know all the training frequency 
research explored so far kept all other weekly  
training variables constant, including the number 
of weekly sets performed for a muscle group.
This was simply because we want to isolate 
the effects of training frequency and not have  
other training variables confound stuff.
But away from the lab and in the real 
world, increasing training frequency  
can be a tool to help increase the number of 
weekly sets you perform for a muscle group.
For example, a person might be 
performing 2 full-body workouts per week,  
so each muscle group is trained 
at a twice per week frequency.
Then, to further increase the number of 
weekly sets performed for their muscle groups,  
they add a third full-body workout per week.
Now, why would a person even 
want to increase the number  
of weekly sets performed for a muscle group?
Some evidence suggests modestly increasing 
the number of weekly sets performed for a  
muscle group in trained individuals 
can accelerate muscle hypertrophy.
Aube et al. found in men with at 
least 3 years of training experience,  
there was no statistical difference in mid and 
anterior thigh growth between performing 12,  
18, or 24 weekly sets for the quadriceps.
However, when the researchers split all 
subjects into either a low responder,  
high responder, or moderate responder 
group, something interesting was found.
Remember, the subjects of this study had at least  
3 years of training experience and were 
training before the study took place.
It seems that those that grew their mid anterior 
thigh the most in the high responder group had  
increased their weekly sets by the greatest number 
relative to what they were doing before the study.
In other words, increasing the weekly sets 
performed for a muscle group seems to be  
an effective way to accelerate muscle 
hypertrophy for these trained folks.
Another study by Scarpelli et al. recruited 
trained men and had them train the unilateral  
leg extension and unilateral leg 
press twice per week for 8 weeks.
With one leg, each subject individually performed  
20% more weekly sets for their quadriceps 
than what they were doing before the study.
With their other leg, all subjects performed  
a prescribed number of weekly sets for 
the quadriceps, this was 22 weekly sets.
It was found vastus lateralis growth was greater 
for the leg performing 20% more weekly sets.
Put differently, a progressive 
increase in weekly sets  
(20%) seems to be beneficial for muscle growth.
An interesting point is for 
8 out of the 16 subjects,  
the prescribed number of weekly sets (22 
weekly sets) was actually more than 20% of  
the weekly sets they had been performing 
for their quadriceps before the study  
(it ranged from being 30% to 120% more 
weekly sets than usual for these subjects).
Yet, results still favored the leg that performed 
20% more weekly sets. This finding emphasizes  
that larger jumps (30-120%) in weekly sets 
are not necessarily better than more modest  
(20%) increases in weekly 
sets for muscle hypertrophy.
In summary, modestly increasing the number 
of weekly sets you perform for a muscle group  
seems to be an effective way to accelerate 
muscle hypertrophy in trained individuals.
Increasing training frequency can be a tool 
to help increase your weekly set numbers.
When training with 12 or fewer 
weekly sets per muscle group,  
training frequency does not seem 
to impact muscle hypertrophy.
When training with more than 12 weekly sets 
per muscle group, data conflicts on the optimal  
training frequency. Individual differences 
could explain these conflicting findings.
Yet, a limitation with this data is short rest 
intervals (1-1.5 minutes) were mainly used.  
If they used longer rest 
intervals (2.5 to 3 minutes),  
lower frequencies could be suboptimal, 
but this is currently speculative.
Finally, outside of the lab and in the real world,  
increasing training frequency can probably 
be an effective tool to increase weekly set  
numbers for a muscle group. This is notable as 
some evidence indicates in trained individuals,  
modestly increasing weekly set numbers 
can accelerate muscle hypertrophy.