What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com, and in
this video here today I wanted to talk a bit
about the use of lifting straps.
So should you use lifting straps or are they
just a “crutch” that should be avoided?
You'll hear this a lot when the topic comes
up.
You know, guys will chime in and say something
along the lines of, you know, lifting straps
or weak or real lifters don't use them, or
something to that effect.
So I just wanted to give you my advice quickly
here on this topic.
Before I jump into the video, guys, make sure
to go ahead and hit the subscribe button below
to stay in the loop on all of my future videos.
And you can also click the little bell button
as well and that way you'll be notified anytime
I upload a new video, if you do enjoy this
content.
So to put it simply: whether or not you should
use lifting straps as part of your training
or lifting hooks, same idea.
But whether or not you should use them completely
and totally depends on your personal goals
and on what you're trying to achieve in the
gym.
Everyone has their own specific reasons and
nobody else can tell you whether your personal
goals or whether what you're specifically
interested in achieving is right or wrong.
And I'm going to be doing another video going
into more detail on that subject soon, but
when it comes to lifting straps it's really
just a matter of looking at the potential
benefits and the potential drawbacks, and
then deciding whether using them would have
a nett positive effect in terms of reaching
your specific goals.
The whole idea of whether or not using lifting
straps makes you more or less manly in the
gym is pretty much just ridiculous in my view.
I don't even really think it's something to
even consider when you're trying to decide
whether or not you should use them.
I think some guys just take weight training
a bit too seriously.
I mean, I've been training consistently for
over 15 years and I love doing it and I would
recommend it to pretty much everyone, but
don't forget that at the end of the day it's
just lifting weights in a gym.
It's not this super hardcore thing.
You're not fighting for your life on the beaches
of Normandy here.
You're picking up a bar off the ground basically.
So lifting straps or no lifting straps, I
wouldn't use that as a serious metric to evaluate
your toughness.
And the reality is that, most of the same
people who would say to not use lifting straps
for that reason, or because they see them
as a crutch, are the exact same people who
would have no issues using a lifting belt,
or lifting shoes, or knee wraps, or you could
even extend it further into something like
using a pre-workout.
It's just a tool to enhance your training
to get the results you want.
So if your goals are primarily hypertrophy
based, so your main focus in the gym is on
increasing your muscle size, and if you find
that using lifting straps helps you activate
the targeted muscle more effectively on certain
exercises then go ahead and use them.
I've used lifting straps in my routine for
almost the entire time I've been training.
And I use them on pretty much all back exercises,
especially, for heavier stuff like shrugs,
or for things like Romanian deadlifts as well,
or on even heavier sets of rows things, like
that.
I definitely find that by not having to think
about my grip, I can just put a hundred percent
of my focus on overloading the specific muscle
I'm trying to hit.
And I also find that my traps and lats and
mid-back muscles end up getting a better workout
that way.
It's not a dramatic difference and I could
still do fine without them, but since having
a super strong grip just isn't really a big
deal to me, it's not something I have practical
use for, it makes sense for me to get that
maybe, you know, extra ten or fifteen percent
improvement in muscle activation by going
ahead and using lifting straps on certain
lifts.
Now, on the other hand if you are training
primarily for strength and grip strength is
an important thing to you, or you just have
actual practical day-to-day use for it, or
if you're a power lifter, or an Olympic lifter,
and you need to be able to perform your lifts
without straps then of course don't use them.
It just depends on your goals.
And then the other possibility is that you're
training both for aesthetics and you also
want to maximize your strength as well including
your grip strength.
In that case, I think a good option would
be to use lifting straps or hooks on certain
exercises if you find them beneficial in terms
of building muscle, and then just incorporate
separate grip strength exercises into your
training.
Because, keep in mind that targeted grip training
exercises are still going to build up your
grip strength a lot more effectively than
what you're going to get just by not using
straps on, you know, rows ,or pull downs,
or things like that.
Because with the actual grip specific exercises
you can actually take your grip all the way
to failure using the full loads that they're
capable of handling.
Whereas on regular weight training exercises,
you're probably not going anywhere near failure,
in which case your grip may not even be getting
that great of a workout in the first place.
So the bottom line on this is that, just like
a lifting belt, or lifting shoes, or pre workouts,
or even listening to music when you train,
weight lifting straps are just an optional
tool that certain lifters can use depending
on their goals.
From a pure muscle building perspective, I
think they are helpful for back training when
they're used properly.
So if hypertrophy is your main goal I don't
think it hurts to give them a try.
One of the biggest challenges with back training
is being able to take your forearms and biceps
a bit more out of the equation and shift the
stress onto your actual back muscles.
And that's why a lot of lifters tend to have
underdeveloped backs.
And I think lifting straps are one way of
helping to improve on that.
So, I think it is worth experimenting with
for those who mostly train for aesthetic purposes.
So thanks for watching, guys.
Lifting straps or no lifting straps, if you
want to get access to my recommended step-by-step
workouts to maximize your progress in the
shortest time, along with proper nutrition
and supplementation guidelines, then you can
check out my complete Body Transformation
Blueprint' System by clicking here or by visiting
www.BTBluePrint.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
Don't forget to like, comment, and subscribe
if you enjoyed the video.
You can follow me on facebook and Instagram
for more daily tips if you aren't already.
The links for that are also below.
And the official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I'll see in
the next video.