Testosterone is probably the most 
discussed hormone in the fitness industry,  
largely due to its role in hypertrophy.
Firstly, it's worth 
establishing some basic details.
Under normal conditions, It's very broadly 
estimated around 70% of total testosterone  
is strongly bound to SHGB (that is, 
sex-hormone-binding globulin), 20-30%  
weakly bound to albumin, and the remaining 1-2% 
is bound to nothing, and called free testosterone.
Testosterone strongly bound to SHBG cannot have 
an active effect on tissues. Testosterone bound  
to albumin, due to the binding being 
weak, can actively impact tissues.  
Free testosterone, of course, is 
freely capable of exerting effects too.
When administered exogenously to evoke 
sustained elevations above normal levels,  
we know it can powerfully enhance hypertrophy 
adaptations in response to lifting weights.
However, what about the somewhat inverse of this?
Does lifting weights increase testosterone?
In a previous article, we saw that lifting weights 
can temporarily spike testosterone concentrations.  
But In this particular video, 
we'll be focusing on if lifting  
weights can chronically increase 
your resting testosterone levels.
This seems like a straightforward question. Yet,  
closer inspection would reveal an 
array of factors worth considering.
Are we talking previously untrained or trained 
individuals, young or older individuals? 
What are the baseline testosterone 
levels of the person in question? 
What were the training 
variables and exercises used? 
Finally, are we talking about total testosterone, 
free testosterone, or bioavailable testosterone  
(note, bioavailable testosterone refers to 
both albumin-bound and free testosterone)?
Accordingly, as we dissect the 
current existing literature,  
we'll do our best to ensure 
these factors are considered.
Let's dive in.
Two Meta-Analyses 
Firstly, a recent 2021 meta-analysis by Potter et  
al. combined findings of 9 
randomized control trials,  
all conducted on previously un resistance-trained 
men ranging from 18-75 years old.
The normal total testosterone range 
for men roughly lies between 270ng/dl  
to 1070 ng/dl, and the subject's average levels 
in these 9 studies fell within this range.
Most studies had subjects perform 2-3 full-body 
workouts a week, with mainly compound exercises  
comprising the program, with movements like 
the leg press, bench press, and lat pulldown  
commonly used. Largely 6-12 weekly sets were 
performed for the trained muscle groups, with  
repetitions performed to or very close to failure 
with loads between 50% and 80% one-rep max.
Below are the approximate results, 
indicating lifting weights had  
no significant effect on resting 
total testosterone concentrations.
A 2018 meta-analysis by Hayes and Elliot further 
supports this conclusion, with older men.
17 randomized and unrandomized control trials 
conducted on previously un resistance-trained  
men at or above the age of 60, with 
the large majority of subjects still  
within the normal total, bioavailable, or 
free testosterone ranges, were combined.
Like before, most studies included 2-3 full-body 
workouts per week, with mainly compound exercises  
comprising the program, with movements like 
the leg press, bench press, and lat pulldown  
commonly used. Largely 6-12 weekly sets were 
performed for the trained muscle groups, with  
repetitions performed to or very close to failure 
with loads between 50% and 80% one-rep max.
Below are the findings, indicating lifting 
weights did not have a significant effect on free,  
bioavailable, or total testosterone 
resting concentrations.
What About Other Individuals?
So, the two detailed meta-analyses indicate  
in men of varying ages, lifting weights does 
not impact resting testosterone concentrations.
However, it's worth reiterating all 
this data was derived from previously  
untrained men who were largely 
within normal testosterone ranges.
What about trained men, or men with 
low total testosterone concentrations  
(roughly defined as below 270ng/dl)?
Could lifting weights impact resting 
concentrations in either of these demographics?
Individuals With Below Normal Testosterone Levels
Exploring the low testosterone demographic first,  
3 comparable randomized trials out of Denmark 
recruited men between 60-78 years old,  
with low bioavailable testosterone concentrations  
(the average levels were around 129ng/dl) and a 
waist circumference greater than 94 centimeters.
These studies set out to examine the 
effects of exogenous testosterone treatment  
(in the form of gel) with resistance training.  
However, they were groups that only 
resistance-trained with a placebo gel.
Subjects trained 2-3 times per week for 10 weeks.
They trained leg presses, 
knee extensions, leg curls,  
chest presses, lat pulldowns, back extensions,  
and crunches for 2-3 sets with reps very likely 
to or close to failure with 6-10 rep-max loads.
In all three studies, the placebo group 
that resistance-trained did not experience  
increases in bioavailable testosterone. Indicating 
even in older men with low testosterone levels,  
lifting weights may have no effect on 
resting testosterone concentrations.
Trained Individuals
As for trained individuals,  
a couple of studies provide insight.
Schwanbeck et al. had 15 men with 
an average of around 2.5 years of  
training experience perform a free 
weight or machine-only program.
The respective group's programs are on-screen.  
Each exercise was trained 
for 3-4 sets of 4-10 reps.
This study assessed free testosterone, with 
baseline measures being in the normal range.  
After the training period, neither group 
experienced any changes in resting concentrations.
Mangine et al. had 33 men with 2 years of average 
training experience perform a range of exercises.
One group trained each exercise for 4 sets 
of 3-5 reps with 90% one-rep max loads,  
while another group used 4 sets of 
10-12 reps with 70% one-rep max loads.
Subjects were within the normal total 
testosterone ranges. After the study,  
neither group experienced any changes in 
resting total testosterone concentrations.
Mccall et al. recruited men 
with prior training experience  
(no further details were given) who were 
within the normal total testosterone ranges.
They trained 4 biceps 
exercises and 4 other exercises  
(again, no further details were given) 
for 3 sets with a 10-rep max load.
After 12 training weeks, resting total 
testosterone concentrations were unchanged.
Finally, Ostrowski et al. had 35 men 
with 1-4 years of training experience  
train a range of exercises for sets 
of 7-12 repetitions to failure.
Some subjects trained each exercise for 1 set 
(the low volume group), some 2 sets per exercise  
(the moderate volume group), and the rest used 
3 sets per exercise (the high volume group).
Neither group experienced 
statistically significant  
changes in total testosterone resting 
concentrations as a result of training.
I should note the data of this 
study was kind of all of the place,  
as you can see with the numbers provided 
below. The data was highly variable  
(as indicated by the standard deviations), 
making it difficult to decipher anything.
Studies Finding an Increase 
in Resting Testosterone Levels 
So, all the data assessed so far indicates 
lifting weights has no impact on resting  
testosterone concentrations. Yet, I'm 
aware of two studies contrasting with this.
Izquierdo et al. had Spanish nation team basque 
ball players with resistance training experience,  
and within the normal total testosterone ranges,  
train the parallel squat and bench 
press twice per week for 11 weeks.
Subjects were either allocated to 
a failure or non-failure group.
During the first 6 weeks, the 
failure group trained each  
exercise with 3 sets of reps to 
failure with a 10 rep-max load,  
while the non-failure group used 6 
sets of 5 reps with a 10 rep max load.
Throughout this period, neither group experienced  
changes in resting total 
testosterone concentrations.
During the next 5 weeks, the failure group trained 
each movement with 3 sets of reps to failure with  
a 6 rep-max load, while the non-failure group 
used 6 sets of 3 reps with a 6 rep-max load.
Throughout this period, the failure group's 
resting total testosterone concentrations remained  
unchanged, but the non-failure group's resting 
total testosterone concentrations were increased.
Thus, perhaps compound exercises with heavy 
loads, but only performing a few repetitions,  
alters total testosterone resting concentrations.
However, it's difficult to verify this claim as 
there are no similar studies as far as I know.  
The closest paper was the previously mentioned 
Mangine et al. study, which found in one  
group of subjects training a range of compound 
exercises for 3-5 reps with 90% one-rep max loads,  
resting total testosterone 
concentrations remained unaltered.
Still, differences between these two studies,  
such as the precise training 
variables and participants exist.
As for the second study, Kraemer et al. 
had 8 young men (with an average age of  
30) and 9 older men (with an average age of 
62), within the normal testosterone ranges,  
train a range of exercises with the loads used 
varying across the three training days per week.
Throughout 10 weeks of training, neither the 
young nor older men experienced increases in  
resting total testosterone concentrations. 
But, the young men did experience increases  
in resting free testosterone concentrations, 
this was not the case for the older men.
Despite this finding, a comparably designed 
study by Petrella et al. conflicts.
13 young men ( between 20-35) and 13 older 
men (between 60-75) trained the leg extension,  
leg press, and squat each for 3 sets of 8-12 
repetitions, three times per week for 16 weeks.
Neither the young nor older 
men experienced an increase in  
resting total or free testosterone concentrations.
Though, it's still worth noting exercise 
selection did differ between this study  
and the one by Kraemer, so it's not clear 
if this may explain the divergent outcomes.
Summary 
In summary, the majority of evidence indicates in 
a wide range of individuals, lifting weights does  
not appear to increase resting total, free, 
or bioavailable testosterone concentrations.
Yet, it's worth considering this data does 
not necessarily prove lifting weights never  
increases resting testosterone concentrations.
It remains plausible that 
training variables could matter.  
Virtually all of the data we assessed 
had subjects train with full-body splits,  
but what about something like bro-splits. 
Moreover, minimal data explore the effects  
of training with loads above 80% one-rep max, 
as well as different proximities from failure.
Finally, virtually all of the data 
assessed lasted 12 weeks or less.  
What about many months or even years?
For example, Hakkinen et al. found after 
following up on elite weightlifters for 2 years,  
their resting total testosterone 
concentrations had elevated.  
However, there are two problems with this data.
Firstly, they were weightlifters, and as such 
would have been regularly training Olympic lifts,  
which is not what most recreational or 
competitive individuals after muscle  
hypertrophy or typical strength gains would do. 
It's not clear how this would influence things.
Secondly, although the researchers stated 
they were not taking anabolic steroids  
before or during the 2 years, I'm a little 
skeptical of this as they were established  
champions or record holders in 
Finland with impressive numbers.