Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this video
I want to talk a little bit about the issue
of creatine and hair loss, which is a potential
creatine side effect that has been discussed
quite a bit over the past few years.
So does creatine cause baldness, or is this
just a myth?
Now, the exact causes of male pattern baldness
aren’t fully understood and I’m definitely
not an expert on that particular subject,
but it does seem to be pretty closely linked
to a compound called DHT, or “dihydrotestosterone”.
And in people who are sensitive to DHT because
of genetic reasons, nutrients are basically
blocked off from being absorbed by the hair
follicles and this causes them to shrink over
time.
So back in 2009 there was a study done on
rugby players to see how creatine affects
levels of DHT in the blood.
One group did a standard 25 gram per day loading
phase for 1 week followed by 2 weeks at a
maintenance dose of 5 grams, and the other
group was just given pure glucose.
And at the end of the study it was shown that
in the group who did supplement with the creatine
there was a 56% increase in DHT levels after
the first week, and that dropped off to 40%
after the 2 weeks at a maintenance dose.
So, that study is basically the main evidence
that we have on this topic and everything
related to creatine and hair loss ultimately
comes from this one particular study.
Now, it definitely is interesting, but let
me give you a few important to consider before
making any hard conclusions here.
Number 1, again, this is just one single study
and the results have never actually been replicated,
and studies show varying results for different
things all the time, so definitely keep that
I mind.
Number 2, DHT levels dropped by 16% after
the creatine dose was reduced, and since the
study was only 3 weeks long it is possible
that those levels would have continued to
drop over time.
25 grams is a lot to take in one day and as
I’ve discussed many times before there’s
really no need at all for a creatine loading
phase, so, we really don’t know what the
results would have looked like if the study
had carried on for a longer period of time
or if a lower dose was used right from the
start.
Point number 3, hormone levels do fluctuate
quite a bit over any given 24 hour period,
and we don’t actually know if the DHT levels
were measured at the same time every day.
Number 4, we don’t have any information
about the specific training or nutrition programs
that were followed, and research has actually
shown that intense training on its own can
actually cause an increase in DHT, so even
if the training program wasn’t the sole
cause for the increase, it still could have
played a role.
And number 5, yes you will see forum threads
with guys saying that they started supplementing
with creatine and then they experienced hair
loss as a result, but given the millions of
people who supplement with creatine all around
the world who would have been prone to hair
loss no matter what, it’s obvious just based
on coincidence alone that some lifters would
see what looks like a connection between the
two even if there really isn’t an actual
connection there, so I would definitely take
those reports with a grain of salt.
So bottom line, does creatine cause hair loss
and balding in men, well, the short answer
is that we really don’t know for sure.
I wish I could give a definitive guideline
here, but like with many issues when it comes
to fitness supplements, the answers are not
black and white.
But that said my overall advice would be this.
First off, if you currently have a strong
hairline with a full head of hair and hair
loss doesn't run in your family, then I really
wouldn’t worry about it and that’s because
it’s not necessarily an increase in DHT
levels itself that causes hair loss, but instead,
it’s how sensitive your body is to that
DHT based on your genetics.
So, even if there is a link between creatine
and baldness, it would only be an issue of
concern for guys who are genetically prone
to it in the first place.
And secondly, if early hair loss does run
in your family or you are already noticing
it yourself, then it’s really up to you
to just take the evidence that’s available
here and make your own decision.
I personally don’t consider this one study
to be a serious cause for alarm because of
the facts that I just mentioned, it is just
one study after all, but it is up to you to
just weigh out the possibilities for yourself.
One thing I would mention though is that if
you do decide to use creatine and you want
to absolutely minimize the risk here, then
juststick to a lower dose of 3 grams per day
just to be on the safe side because even 3
grams per day is still going to allow for
maximum creatine benefits in most people.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more science-based, no nonsense training,
nutrition and supplementation advice to maximize
your muscle building and your fat burning
progress, along with concrete step by step
plans that you can follow, make sure to head
over to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab
my complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System by clicking the icon at the top of
the video or using the link in the description
box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.