What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanjy here; www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video today I’m going to be
doing another supplement review; this time
on the very popular Cellucor C4 pre-workout.
Now, this has been one of the top selling
pre-workout on the market for quite a while
now, a lot of hype behind it.
And in this video I’m going to be giving
you a completely unbiased, science-based look
at the product so you can decide if it’s
really worth your money.
You’ll find a lot of other C4 reviews online
but if you look, you’ll see that they’re
usually either put out by supplement retailers
who are ultimately just trying to sell the
product to you, or they’re put out by people
just giving really vague generalized overview
without any real explanation of the actual
formula.
So I’m going to just break this down step-by-step.
The main components of the C4 pre-workout
are beta-Alanine, creatine nitrates and arganine
akg.
And then you have the energy blend, which
is caffeine and L-tyrosine and tetramethyluric
acid.
So, first off we have beta alanine at 1.6
grams.
Now, beta-Alanine is a good research backed
supplement.
It’s something that I think is worth a try
if you already have the basics covered, so
nothing wrong with that.
However, the proper dosage for beta-Alanine
is typically between 3.2 to 6.4 grams; so
one scoop of C4 gives you half of the minimum
recommended dosage.
Now, you could take two scoops to get the
full dosage but I’ll mention later on why
I don’t recommend that.
Next up is creatine-nitrate, now creatine
itself is also a highly research backed supplement.
It’s actually the most studied sport supplements
out there and it’s the single best natural
muscle building compound there is.
However, there’s no research at all to show
that any form of creatine out there is more
effective than basic creatine mono-hydrate.
The mono-hydrate form has an extremely high
absorption rate in the body and it will fully
saturate the muscles with creatine after about
two to three weeks of use.
And all of the so called advanced forms of
creatine that have come out over the years;
ethyl-ester, hydro-chloride, creatine-nitrate,
these are really just over priced version
of creatine mono-hydrate.
So it’s not that creatine-nitrate is necessarily
bad, but it’s just a more expensive, hyped
up version of creatine that will most likely
give you the same benefits as mono-hydrate.
Now, after that is arginine akg which is typically
used for boosting nitric oxide levels in the
body and increasing blood flow to the muscles.
So two thing on this; first off the research
on arginine akg for that purpose is actually
very weak and unreliable.
There are some studies that show minor benefits
but there are just as many that showed no
benefits.
And this is probably because L-arginine is
really poorly absorbed in the intestines,
so a lot of it can’t even be used by the
body.
But regardless of that, standard pre-workout
dose for L-arginine is usually between 3-6
grams and the C4 pre-workout gives you 1 gram.
So a very low dose even if you were to use
two scoops.
Now, this next point is also really important,
like I said, creatine and beta-Alanine are
good research backed ingredients; I do recommend
them, but keep in mind that the benefit that
you get from those supplements comes from
continual daily use over the long term.
You take them every day, and then that gradually
builds up the levels in your body, and then
any time you train the benefits are going
to automatically be there.
However, they don’t actually have any immediate
direct effects on performance, so there’s
no specific benefit to taking them right before
your workout.
Then since they have to be taken daily to
get the proper benefits, even if you’re
using C4 you’re going to have to buy creatine
and beta-Alanine separately on their own to
take on your off days anyway.
So after that we have the “explosive energy
blend”.
The first ingredient, of course is caffeine,
which is by far the most effective performance
boosting ingredient there is; it’s dirt
cheap, it works and that’s why it’s included
in pretty much every single pre-workout formula
on the market.
The standard dose for caffeine is usually
between 100 to 300 milligrams, and C4 gives
you 150 milligrams so that’s completely
fine.
The second ingredient is L-tyrosine, and this
something that I also do recommend for pre-workout
purposes because it pairs well with caffeine
and it’s good for increasing mental focus.
But the big problem here is that the amount
of L-tyrosine that you’re getting is actually
extremely low.
You’ll notice that the energy blend is based
off of a proprietary blend, that means that
they show you the total amount for all of
the ingredients combined but not the specific
dosage for each one other that the caffeine;
and the reason why companies do this in pretty
much all cases, is so that they can intentionally
under-dosed some ingredients in the product
without the average consumer noticing.
Now if you look at the energy blend, you’ll
see that the total amount combined is 371
milligrams.
And if we know that the caffeine is 150 milligrams
than that only leaves a very small amount
left over for the other ingredients.
My recommendation for L-tyrosine if you actually
want to get real noticeable effects from it
is to use a minimum of 1,000 milligrams up
to around 3,000 milligrams.
So the amount included here is very minimal.
For example, Pre JYM which is another very
popular pre-workout, probably even more popular
than C4, that formula uses 1,500 milligrams
of L-tyrosine just to give you an example.
So, in C4 the amount of L-tyrosine included
is honestly pretty much useless.
And then after you have tetramethyluric acid,
and I can’t really say much on that ingredient,
because it doesn’t really had any human
research on it in terms of training benefits.
And since it listed last in the blend, we
know that the dosage is going to be even lower
than the tyrosine, so it would have to be
a really small amount by default.
So, that covers the actual science behind
the C4 ingredients.
In terms of taste the product is fine this
is the Icy Blue Razz flavor.
I gave it a try, it taste fine but I honestly
don’t see how taste should really be considered
a big selling point because most pre-workout
these days do taste fine and as long as the
taste is tolerable then if you’re actually
really serious about your training then it’s
the effects that we should be focusing on
anyway.
Now, in terms of effects; yes, if you use
the C4 pre-workout you will get an increase
in energy and strength.
I used it before my back workout yesterday
and it gave me that typical pre-workout buzz,
however, the key thing to understand is that
any pre-workouts formula that include caffeine
will technically work.
That’s because caffeine is by far the strongest
ingredient that any of these products used
and so it really doesn’t matter what else
is included or how anything else is dosed.
Because as long as that caffeine in there
you will feel the product’s working.
However, that doesn’t mean that you need
all the other stuff listed in it, or that
you need to pay $30 a bottle for it.
But when you factor in the marketing behind
it and the placebo effect, a lot of people
will use it and think that it’s doing way
more than it actually is.
Now, you could use two coops to bump up the
effects a bit, but in that case you’re only
going to end up with fifteen servings per
bottle, and the price per serving ends up
going really high.
And even then some of the ingredients are
still going to be under-dosed, even with the
two scoops.
So, in terms of practical recommendations
remember that even if you’re using C4 you’ll
still need to buy creatine and beta-Alanine
separately anyway, to take on your off days.
So, your best bet is to do that, buy those
two on their own and then to replicate and
actually improve the direct pre-workout boost
that C4 gives.
You can just buy a bottle of caffeine and
hydrates on its own for pennies per serving,
and then buy some L-tyrosine on its own which
is also dirt cheap.
And then just take the L-tyrosine at the actual
proper dose.
So just buy those four ingredients separately,
and you’ll get stronger effect than you
will from C4 itself, and for way cheaper,
probably less than half the cost per serving,
and will taking all the ingredients at their
full proper dose.
So, I hope you guys find this advice helpful.
If you appreciate the no B.S., science-based
approach to fitness and you want to get all
the tools you need to gain muscle and lose
fat as effectively as possible; the workouts,
the meal plans, the supplement guides along
with one-on-one coaching then you can download
my Body Transformation Blueprint by clicking
here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoy the video as always, make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks again for watching guys, and I’ll
talk to you again soon.