Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
EliteImpactLabs.com and in this video lesson
I just want to answer a very common question
that I get asked which is, "will eating carbs
before bed negatively affect fat loss?"
So, avoiding carbs late at night has been
a pretty standard fat loss dieting method
for a very long time and the logic here is
that because activity and overall metabolic
rate will be at its lowest, that eating carbs
before bed is going to increase the chances
of excess fat storage.
But does eating carbs before bed actually
slow down your overall rate of fat loss?
Well, just like the idea that you have to
eat every 2 to 3 hours throughout the day
in order to maximize your metabolic rate or
that you have to eat clean foods 24 hours
a day to burn fat or that fasting prior to
exercise is going to help you lean down at
a quicker rate, “carb cutoffs” are just
another widely followed fat loss method that
is ultimately unnecessary.
Every single day, your body expends a certain
number of calories and calories are just a
unit of, a measurement of energy rather, in
order to fuel your natural processes like
breathing, digestion and circulation, plus
all of the additional activities that performe
throughout the day.
And this is known as your calorie maintenance
level.
And in order for you to lose body fat, you
have to create a calorie deficit by taking
in fewer calories than you burn and this calorie
deficit is what stimulates your body to tap
into its excess fat stores in order to obtain
a source of fuel.
For example if your calorie maintenance level
is 2500 calories per day, and you’re consistently
consuming 2000 calories through your diet,
then you will have created a calorie deficit
of 500 calories.
And as long as that calorie deficit is consistently
kept in place, the specific timing of your
carbohydrate consumption is not going to make
any difference at all to your overall fat
burning results.
The major mistake that most people make here
is in assuming that fat loss is simply an
“on and off” switch – that you’re
either in fat burning mode or you're in fat
storing mode.
In reality, both processes are actually happening
simultaneously throughout the day.
Some fat is always being stored, and some
fat is always being broken down.
And your net loss or gain in overall body
fat is going to be determined by the sum of
all the fat storing processes that are occurring
minus all of the fat burning processes.
And at the end of the day, your body’s total
energy needs are going to remain constant
so whether you burn more fat earlier in the
day and store more fat later on, or you store
more fat earlier in the day and burn more
fat later on, the net result is still going
to be the same in the big picture.
Your body requires X amount of energy and
is consuming Y amount of energy, and the energy
is going to be used up one way or another
throughout the day.
So, even if eating carbs before bed does cause
a greater amount of immediate fat storage
during that particular time, it makes absolutely
no difference in the overall picture because
that fat is going to inevitably be broken
down throughout the night and the following
day when your body needs it.
So the bottom line is to find out what your
daily needs are for calories, protein and
carbohydrates in order to stimulate fat loss
and you can use our automated calculator over
on EliteImpactLabs.com as a starting point
for that and I'll link that in the description
box below.
And then you just want to focus on hitting
those totals in blocks of about 24 hours.
As long as you’re doing this consistently,
you can pretty much eat your carbs whenever
you most prefer.
If you want to eat you know a giant plate
of pasta 20 minutes before going to bed or
if you want to wake up in the middle of the
night and go eat a big bowl of fruit and yogurt
and granola, you can go right ahead because
as long as your overall net calorie intake
is being properly tracked, then eating carbs
before bed or even in the middle of the night
is NOT going to magically cause you to gain
more total body fat over the long run.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
And also make sure to join us over on the
Elite Impact Labs Facebook page for daily
articles, videos, tips and muscle building
supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video and I'll
talk to you again soon with more free tips.