If you're in the mind frame of, "I feel motivated,
therefore I take action," or I don't feel
motivated, therefore I don't take action,"
there's almost no chance that you're going
to succeed in the long run at any decent sized
goal that you've set for yourself, whether
it's fitness related or non-fitness related.
What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj realscienceathletics.com.
And in this video today, I'm going to be sharing
with you five important mindset shifts to
adopt that will hugely increase your chances
for success with your muscle building program
over the long-term.
A lot of people out there tend to focus mainly
on the mechanical side of things, in terms
of proper training and nutrition, but remember
that your ability to actually implement those
things on a consistent basis, that highly
depends on being in the right frame of mind
to begin with.
Your overall attitude and the way that you're
viewing and perceiving things throughout your
fitness journey, that can very easily make
the difference between success and failure,
and so I want to share a few things here that
I think you'll find it really helpful.
Things that I've learned along the way, and
that I found really helpful over the years
myself.
And if you want to be able to take these mindset
tips and pair them up with an actual, structured
step-by-step program so that you know exactly
what to do in terms of training, nutrition,
to achieve your goal physique in the most
efficient way, whether your goal is to build
muscle or lose fat, make sure to head over
to SeanNal.com/custom.
I am going to link it up here and in the description
box below.
Just fill out the form on that page and I'll
personally compile a customized training,
nutrition, and supplementation plan for you,
based on your current condition, body stats,
activity level, and goals.
It's 100% free.
I can only do a limited number of programs
per day, so if you want to grab a custom fitness
plan from me, then make sure to check that
out.
So diving into the five mindset tips now.
Tip number one is to keep in mind that every
single fit person out there was once a complete
beginner too.
Okay.
Everybody started somewhere.
It might be easy to just look at the polished
sort of finished product of someone who's
already put in the time and effort to build
an impressive physique, and then to put that
person up on a pedestal and think it's this
huge lofty goal only reserved for a select
few.
But keep in mind that every single one of
those people all started out as a complete
beginner at one time.
They don't have any magical, special qualities
that you don't also have.
A lot of them were really skinny or overweight
to begin with, which is what actually motivated
them to get into fitness in the first place.
But they had a vision, they had a goal, they
followed a process, and they got a result.
So follow the same process and you'll get
the same result.
It's really that simple.
Of course, genetics come into play.
Okay, there's no question about that, I've
talked about that many times before.
But virtually anybody out there can build
an impressive physique if they just committed
to a proper program and they follow through
on it.
I mean, speaking for myself, I remember when
I first started working out, I was naturally
skinny, I was insecure about it, and I knew
absolutely nothing about lifting.
It was this whole foreign world to me.
I didn't know what a compound exercise was.
I had zero concept of calories or macronutrients.
I didn't know what whey protein or creatine
was.
I remember printing off these little exercise
tutorials and being down in the basement with
my plastic weight set from Walmart trying
to follow the instructions.
And I even remember my older brother's friends
coming over and actually making fun of me
for even trying.
And now here I am as a fitness coach making
YouTube videos and teaching other people how
to get in shape.
So again, don't pedestalize anyone.
The people that you see at the gym who are
in great shape are literally just you in the
future if you just put in the work.
And this mindset shift is very important because
aside from just having the basic desire to
achieve something in the first place, one
of the main things that's going to really
push you into action and cause you to commit
is when you already know in advance that you're
going to succeed.
It's when you see that possibility as 100%
real and you know, not think, but you know
with absolute certainty that if you just follow
the process, that you will get what it is
that you're after.
And remembering that everybody out there who's
in great shape now was also once a beginner
too, that's going to help you see that end
goal as being much more realistic and much
more attainable for you.
All right.
Mindset shift number two is to recognize the
longterm ROI that fitness provides.
It's really easy to just think short-term
and focus on the immediate gain that you're
going to get once you commit to your program,
but a very important thing to keep in mind
is that by just putting in the work in the
beginning stages and building up the proper
training and nutrition habits, you're actually
setting yourself up for an entire lifetime
of benefits.
This isn't just something that you're going
to be doing for the next six months or the
next two years, this is a lifelong gain that
will benefit you 10, 20, 60 years or more
down the line.
And in a wide variety of ways.
Okay.
Not just aesthetically in terms of how you
look, but also just in terms of overall health,
strength, energy, mindset.
And I would say that on average, probably
something like one to two years is all it
takes to really get a solid handle on things.
To where your workouts have just become a
completely normal part of your weekly routine,
where nutrition is mostly automatic and not
something you have to really think too much
about, and to where you've built a solid muscular
foundation, and have achieved a fairly impressive
physique that you're proud of.
And one to two years is really not a long
time when you fit that into the overall scope
of your life.
So if you're still new at this and you're
feeling a bit overwhelmed at the start with
all the new information you're trying to absorb,
which is totally normal, just remember that
fitness is a skill just like anything else.
Okay.
It's normal to go through an initial grind
period where things seem unfamiliar and maybe
a bit frustrating, but as you learn it and
as you slowly integrated into your life, over
the longer term, it just gets easier and easier
and more and more automatic.
And the effort that you're putting in right
now to adopt these new habits is not just
going to serve you in the short-term, but
it's literally going to benefit you for the
rest of your life.
So keeping that long-term ROI in mind will
help to motivate you through the initial stages
when things naturally feel more challenging
because it will help you to see the bigger
picture reward that's involved.
Tip number three is to adopt a slow and steady
frame of mind.
So many people out there approach their muscle
building goals with a speed mindset, and they're
always trying to rush things and force the
process to happen as quickly as possible.
And with all the quick fix information out
there nowadays, I can't really blame people
for falling into this sort of mindset, especially
beginners.
But the reality is that trying to build muscle
fast is actually one of the biggest mindset
mistakes you can make, and it actually increases
the chances that you'll end up making certain
mistakes in your approach, and they're going
to slow down your progress in the long-term,
or even throw your entire plan off track altogether.
It could cause you to overeat and take in
too many calories thinking that this is going
to speed up your rate of growth, when in reality,
all that's going to do is lead to excessive
body fat gains.
It could cause you to become impatient in
the gym and start adding weight to your exercises
too quickly, which is going to hugely increase
your risk for injury and force you to spend
more time on the sidelines recovering, or
possibly even lead to permanent joint issues
moving forward.
And it can also cause you to become impatient
because you just have unrealistic expectations
when it comes to muscle growth rates for a
natural lifter, which then leads to discouragement
and the loss of motivation.
So it's very important to understand and to
acknowledge right from the outset, okay, before
you even get started, that building muscle
to a significant degree is a game of months
and years, not days and weeks.
So stop checking the mirror every two hours
expecting to see huge gains in a matter of
days.
Anywhere from one to three pounds of total
weight gain per month is what a beginner to
intermediate lifter should realistically expect
in the first couple of years.
So slow down, take your time, and focus on
quality training and nutrition, a moderate
calorie surplus, gradual progression in the
gym, slow and steady weight gain from month
to month.
Stay patient, and then let those small winds
stack up over time.
Nothing major is going to happen between any
two individual weeks, but when you extrapolate
it over the long-term, six months, one year,
two years, that's when you'll really start
seeing significant gains.
In the big picture, taking a slower approach
is actually the fastest way to gain muscle,
as counterintuitive as that might seem.
All right.
Tip number four is to focus on consistency
rather than perfection.
So if you're getting started with your muscle
building program and you're expecting full-on
perfection from yourself, and you think that
the entire process is just going to be clean
and smooth sailing all the way through, and
you're going to get from A to Z in a straight
linear fashion, then it's very important that
you forget about that because that's just
not how the process works in the real world.
It's going to be messy at times, and if you're
expecting to not experience any setbacks or
bumps in the road, then when those things
do happen, you're going to be way more likely
to get discouraged by them and have a much
harder time getting back on track.
There are going to be times where your diet
goes off course, whether it's for one day
or a week or even an entire month.
You're probably going to have ebbs and flows
in terms of your motivation, and sometimes
lose excitement over the process and question
it, and not feel like going to the gym or
sticking to your nutrition.
You're going to have little pains and injuries
that'll probably come up along the way.
You'll have issues with your work or your
social life that distract you from your fitness
goals.
All of these things are totally normal, and
they happen to everyone from time to time.
So if you truly want to succeed at this, then
you have to knowledge upfront that there are
going to be challenges involved, and that
you are going to struggle here and there.
And when you're able to fully accept that
going in, then those challenges will be a
lot easier to overcome because you'll understand
that those struggles, they don't mean that
you've gone off course, but instead the struggles
are actually part of the overall course itself.
This is not going to be a straight line from
where you are now, all the way to where you
want to be.
Okay.
It's going to be a series of ups and downs.
And the most important thing is just that
the general trend is moving in the right direction.
You might have days or weeks or even entire
months, or even several months in a row where
things don't go the way you expected.
But if, in the big picture, you're gradually
moving closer to your goal, then you will
get there eventually, given enough time, as
long as you don't quit.
And the fact that you simply reach your goal
period, that's far more important than the
specific timeframe that it takes to get there.
And lastly on the list, we have mindset tip
number five, which is to stop relying on motivation.
You've probably heard this before, but motivation
comes and goes, it's fleeting, it's unreliable.
And if you're in the mind frame of, "I feel
motivated, therefore I take action," or, "I
don't feel motivated, therefore I don't take
action," there's almost no chance that you're
going to succeed in the long run at any decent
sized goal that you've set for yourself, whether
it's fitness related or non-fitness related.
So unless you truly have a legitimate reason
to postpone or skip a training session, you
need to be able to just go ahead and execute
on it, even if you don't really want to on
a given day.
Yes, skipping one workout is not going to
have any real negative effect on your actual
body composition because it takes two weeks
off or more to start actually losing lean
mass, but it's more so just about making sure
that you maintain overall consistency and
momentum with your program.
Skip one workout because you don't feel like
it, and then it becomes much easier to skip
the next one and the next one, and to just
keep spiraling downwards.
And it also gives you justification to let
your diet go off track.
And that's going to have its own compounding
effect as well.
Keep in mind that a huge percentage of muscle
building and fat loss success is about building
up daily systems and habits until they more
or less become automatic.
Going to the gym should basically feel like
brushing your teeth or showering.
It's not something that you really think too
much about or consider skipping, but it's
just something that you do because it's part
of your normal routine.
If you're still a beginning lifter or you're
coming back after an extended layoff, then
it will require discipline and willpower in
those initial stages to build up those habits.
And you probably will have to just grind through
and push through, and force yourself sometimes,
even when you don't feel the motivation at
all to do it.
But as you push through each time and you
just take acton, regardless of how you feel,
you'll notice that it slowly becomes easier
and easier and less willpower is required
because it's become a standard routine that
your brain expects and that you're actually
getting rewards from.
And eventually, the opposite will probably
happen.
And that's where you'll actually start looking
forward to the gym and looking forward to
maintaining your healthy eating habits as
well.
You'll actually want to do these things because
your brain is starting to perceive them as
a positive, rather than as a negative.
Both in terms of how the consistent training
and nutrition is making you feel, and also
from the concrete external results that you're
getting from it.
So get a proper plan in place, execute on
it, no matter how motivated or unmotivated
you might feel, and know that over time, motivation
itself becomes less and less of a factor to
begin with, because training and nutrition
are ingrained habits that you'll just start
doing automatically.
So thanks for watching guys.
If you found these five mindset tips helpful
and you want to support the channel while
maximizing the effectiveness of your fitness
program at the same time, then make sure to
check out my sports nutrition line, RealScience
Athletics.
Which, unlike most of the poorly formulated
junk out there in the industry nowadays, offers
100% evidence-based supplements you can trust
to optimize your muscle building and fat burning
results.
Just head over to realscienceathletics.com,
and you can use coupon code YOUTUBE15 to save
15% off your entire first order.
You can also follow me over on Instagram as
well for more daily tips and updates @sean_nalewanyj.
And as always, make sure to hit that like
button, leave a comment, and subscribe below
if you haven't already, in order to stay updated
on future videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.