Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, SeanNal.com,
BodyTransformationTruth.com, and in this video
I’m going to be giving you the #1 most important
factor when it comes to building bigger calves.
So yes, proper form is definitely important
like I’ve talked about in previous videos,
because you do want to make sure that you’re
properly activating your calves on each rep
during your lifts rather than just using your
Achilles tendon, and intensity is also very
important, because if you don’t train using
heavy enough weight and if you don’t take
your calf exercises close enough to the point
of muscular failure then the growth stimulus
just won’t be powerful enough, but in my
opinion the number 1 key to building bigger
calves in the fastest way possible is the
simple issue of prioritization, meaning that
you just need to start treating your calves
with as much or even more focus in comparison
to your other muscle groups, and to stop treating
them as an after-thought during your workouts
like most people do.
A lot of guys who have naturally thin calves
will often complain that they can’t make
any real gains there “no matter what they
do”, but when you actually take a look at
their overall training program, it’s usually
just a few sets of calf raises thrown in here
and there and with less volume than pretty
much all of their other muscle groups.
A lot of these lifters are happy to do 3 sets
of 3 exercises for a really small muscle group
like their biceps, but would never do the
same for their calves even though the calves
actually contain more total mass then the
biceps do.
And on top of that, a lot of people won’t
hesitate to go into the gym and perform a
dedicated arm workout or a dedicated chest
workout or shoulder workout, but it’s pretty
much unheard of for anybody to even consider
going into the gym and doing a dedicated calf
workout.
And I’m not saying that you should do a
workout for your calves only, but it’s just
an example of how almost everybody treats
their calves as a lower priority muscle group
and then at the same time wonder why they
aren’t seeing as much progress there.
Another really important thing to keep in
mind here is that as part of your overall
workout plan, your calves don’t receive
the same amount of indirect stimulation that
most of your other smaller muscle groups do.
For example, any time you train your back,
your biceps are also getting hit very hard
at the same time, any time you do compound
pressing for your chest or shoulders your
triceps are being hit very hard, and your
front and rear shoulders also get a lot of
stimulation during your chest and back workouts,
whereas your calves, they only receive a very
small amount of indirect work.
Exercises like squats and deadlifts and leg
presses do hit your calves to a degree, but
not nearly with the same intensity that your
arms or shoulders get hit with during presses
and rows and vertical pulling movements.
So basically, the situation for most lifters
is that, their calves are trained with less
total sets, lower frequency, while at the
same time not getting much indirect stimulation.
So, aside from the issue of proper form and
exercise selection and intensity, the #1 thing
you need to do to build bigger calves and
to start seeing some real gains there, is
to just start prioritizing them by training
them more often and with more total volume.
It’s really that simple.
Chances are that right now your calves just
aren’t getting the same amount of total
work as your other muscle groups, and they’ll
probably need even more work than those other
muscle groups if you do have naturally skinny
calves to begin with and you want to build
them up significantly, because the truth is
that the calves are a very “genetic dependent”
muscle group.
So if you’re training your calves right
now once or twice a week, just start training
them 3 times a week, or possibly even 4 times
a week if you’re really serious about makig
gains there.
If you’re only doing 3 or 4 sets for calves
per workout, start doing 6-8 sets.
If you always put your calves at the very
end of your workout, start putting them at
the very start.
To put it simply, just start hammering the
crap out of your calves and start treating
them as a priority muscle group with high
frequency, high intensity and lots of volume,
and I guarantee that if you do that consistently
you will start seeing some good results.
It’s going to be a slow and gradual process
no matter what you do, but if you really want
to build bigger calves, then that’s the
way to go about doing it, and the other plus
is that because your calves do tend to recover
very quickly from training, you can hit them
more often and with more volume and still
pretty easily recover from it.
So thanks for watching this video, I hope
you found these tips helpful.
For more useful training advice along with
science-based nutrition and supplementation
tipsto help you maximize your muscle building
and your fat burning progress, make sure to
check out my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the icon here or using the link
in the description box below.
If you enjoyed the video, make sure to hit
the LIKE button, leave a comment and subscribe.
And you can also check out my official blog
at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.