Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video I want to outline four important
calf training tips that you should be applying
to all of your standing calf raise moves (which
is the number one exercise that I recommend
for optimal calf training) if you want to
see the very best results possible.
So aside from a couple of legitimate genetic
disadvantages that do come into play, which
I talked about in a Q &A video that I posted
earlier today, which I'll also link in the
description box, most guys also make several
simple but crucial mistakes in their training
form that make adding significant size to
their calves next to impossible.
So give these 4 tips a try on your next workout
and I guarantee that you'll notice a significant
difference in how effectively you're able
to stimulate your calves.
And keep in mind I'm not going to bother demonstrating
these because these tips are fairly self-explanatory.
So Tip Number 1.
Instead of driving yourself up onto the entire
ball of your front foot, focus on raising
yourself up onto your big toe instead.
This prevents your feet and your ankles from
rolling outward, and maximally stimulates
the inner portion of your calf where the largest
percentage of the muscle mass is located.
If you simply perform a regular calf raise
without thinking about this, then your body
will naturally follow the path of least resistance
and do the opposite, since your big toe is
positioned furthest away.
Give this one a try and you should notice
an immediate improvement in how intensely
you're able to contract your calves on each
rep.
Tip Number 2.
When most people perform standing calf raises,
they place their feet at shoulder width apart
or even narrower throughout the exercise.
And while this certainly will still work when
it comes to stimulating your calves for growth,
an even better approach is to go slightly
wider than shoulder width at an inch or two
outside.
So just like pressing yourself up onto your
big toe, using a wider stance on your calf
raises prevents your ankles from rolling outward
as you press yourself up.
If you do want to mix in some additional sets
using a narrower stance that's perfectly fine,
but use the wider stance as the foundation
of your calf training.
Tip Number 3.
One very common and detrimental calf training
mistake is in the excessive use of momentum.
In fact, it's very rare to see a lifter in
the gym who doesn't perform their calf raises
in this way.
The majority of people simply load up the
weights and then basically bounce their way
through their set by pumping out their reps
without any real pause at the top or at the
bottom of the movement.
When you balance yourself out at the bottom
position of a standing calf raise, you greatly
minimize the amount of tension that you can
place on the actual calf muscles and you redirect
it towards your Achilles tendon instead.
The Achilles tendon is an elastic tissue that
connects the calves to the bottom of your
foot, and when you lower the resistance very
quickly, the Achilles tendon gets loaded on
the way down, and then when you bounce yourself
out of the bottom position, you are basically
using the elastic energy of your Achilles
tendon to raise yourself back up.
And as a result, a much smaller amount of
actual muscular work ends up being involved.
So here's what I would recommend in terms
of optimal calf training rep cadence.
On the positive portion of the rep, press
yourself up as hard and fast as you possibly
can while still maintaining proper form, pause
in the fully contracted position for 1 second,
lower yourself in 3 to 4 seconds, and then
pause in the very bottom stretched position
for a full 2 seconds before pressing yourself
back up again.
This particular cadence will maximize the
stress on your calves and it will minimize
the involvement of your Achilles tendon.
And Tip Number 4.
Keeping a very slight bend in your knees during
your calf raises is a good idea since it will
take some of the stress off of your knee joints,
however, the bend in your knee should be exactly
that, it should be very slight.
If you bend your knees too much you'll greatly
be reducing the effectiveness of your calf
training because what that does is deactivate
the gastrocnemius, which is the head of the
calf where the vast majority of the muscle
is located, and it shifts the emphasis onto
the much smaller and less significant soleus
muscle which runs underneath.
So make sure to bend your knees just enough
so that they aren't completely locked out,
but no further.
So I hope you found these 4 tips useful and
if you want a rundown of my top 5 recommended
calf exercises along with some effective sample
workouts, then check out this post over on
my website and I'll also put the link in the
description box down below.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did find it helpful please make sure
to hit the LIKE button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up-to-date on future videos,
and also make sure to check out my complete
step-by-step muscle building and fat loss
prorams over at BodyTransformationTruth.com
by clicking the link up in the top right corner
here or by using the link down below in the
description box.
Talk to you again soon.