Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
another Muscle in Minutes Q&A, where I answer
your bodybuilding and fitness questions in
two minutes or less.
So, today's question is on the issue of proper
sleep.
So, how important is a proper sleep when it
comes to building muscle and burning fat?
And how much sleep should you be aiming for
each night in order to maximize your results?
So, a proper sleep is obviously a very important
thing not just for bodybuilding purposes,
but for overall health as well.
It's going to keep your mood and energy levels
maximized.
It's going to improve your cognitive function,
so your concentration, your motivation.
In terms of bodybuilding, there's a lot of
specific benefits as well.
A proper sleep is going to optimize testosterone
levels.
It's going to optimize growth hormone output,
as well as improve insulin sensitivity, which
will favorably affect nutrient partitioning.
And in addition to that, the more energy you
have, the stronger you are in the gym.
The better your workouts are going to be.
The more focus you're going to be.
And the better results you're going to get
from that as well.
So, how much sleep should you be getting each
night?
Well, most people tend to go with the standard
recommendation of eight hours of sleep per
night.
In reality it really is going to be a highly
individual thing.
And it's going to vary a lot from person to
person.
Some people can get by on as little as four
or five hours of sleep per night, while some
people need more than that, may be 8, 9, even
10 hours per night.
So, I wouldn't say that there's a single set
amount that you needed to shoot for each night.
It's going to vary.
It's going to depend on you as an individual.
So, all I would say on this question is get
as much sleep as you need each night in order
to make sure that you are feeling rested,
energetic, strong and focused throughout the
day.
The human body is a very intricate complex
machine.
And if you're not getting enough sleep each
night, you're going to know about it.
So, I really think that each individual person
can really answer this question for themselves.
You probably already know the answer for yourself.
So, you know, if you're getting six hours
of sleep each night, and you feel fully rested
and good to go, you know, I wouldn't say,
"Oh, well, you need to go sleep an extra two
hours to hit that -- that specific eight-hour
mark."
Just get as much sleep as you need as an individual
to function optimally throughout the day.
So, that is that question answered.
I hope you found this information useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
featured videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page for daily videos, articles,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again, for watching this video.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free bodybuilding tips.