What’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, SeanNal.com.
And today I wanted to make a video for those
of you out there who watch my channel and
whoever wanting to get into better shape.
Maybe you’re on the thinner side and you’re
wanting to put on muscle, maybe you’re on
the overweight side and you’re wanting to
lean down but you’re having trouble really
getting things off the ground and getting
on to a program that you can stay consistent
with.
Maybe you’ve tried a few times and you falling
off track and quit, or maybe you haven’t
even gotten started yet because you’re just
not quite sure how to go about it or it just
feels like having a great physique is too
complicated, too difficult and then it’s
just something that is sort of out of reach
for you.
And the main point that I wanted to make on
this is to keep in mind that for the majority
of people it’s the beginning stages of a
fitness program that is going to be the most
challenging part and things will get easier
as you progress from week to week.
And the main reason why such a high percentage
of people who begin a muscle building or fat
loss program ultimately end up quitting, and
not reaching their goals is because they aren’t
willing to stick it out, and to basically
grind through those initial stages when proper
training and nutrition is a new habit and
when it isn’t something that they’re used
to doing.
For human beings, replacing existing habits
with new habits is not easy.
You will feel resistance to it, and it takes
time, and patience to really hammer those
new habits into your mind and to have them
become something that feels normal for you.
So, what often happens is that someone will
just dive headfirst into a fitness program.
And it is especially common at this time of
year which is why I wanted to make a video
about this now.
But they’ll just dive in headfirst without
a well-thought-out plan in place.
They’ll stick to it for, you know, maybe
a few weeks, maybe a few months but then they
will gradually start to feel overwhelmed.
Maybe they run into a setback or two.
It starts feeling like something they won’t
be able to stick to long-term.
And then they started reverting back to their
old habits and they eventually quit.
Keep in mind the idea that an object at rest
tends to stay at rest.
And that an object in motion tends to stay
in motion.
It requires a lot more energy and a lot more
effort to get that object to start moving.
But once it starts moving, it takes increasingly
less energy to keep it in motion as it starts
moving faster and faster.
I certainly think you as a car and it will
usually be the same deal with your fitness
program.
So, if you’re going from relatively sedentary
to training hard in the gym multiple days
a week or you’re going from just sort of
eating on the fly throughout the day with
poor nutritional habits to having a more structured
nutrition plan, and be mindful of your food
choices, and your calorie and macro numbers
for the day, that’s going to require a temporary
period of focused effort for you to learn
the ropes, and to get used to it and have
it become a normal part of your life.
There will be frustrations, there will be
moments where you question what you’re doing
and you wonder if it’s worth it.
There will be days where you want to skip
workouts.
This is normal for the most part.
But you have to understand that like anything
in life, whether it’s learning to play an
instrument or a new sport or learning about
a new subject, the hardest part is the very
beginning.
And you have to be willing to hammer through
those initial stages and have faith in the
fact that it will get easier as you move forward.
You know, you might look at those people in
the gym who have impressive physiques and
think it’s this, you know, highly challenging
pie-in-the-sky type of thing.
But for most people who are experienced and
who have gone through that initial learning
phase and who have gotten results, it’s
actually a very simple and straightforward
process.
They started out as a beginner in the same
way you are.
And just like anything else, they tackled
that starting learning curve.
And now, most of it is just probably second
nature for them.
For me personally at this stage, fitness is
almost an effortless thing for me.
I go in and do my workouts without even really
thinking about it, most of the time I actually
look forward to it because I enjoy it and
because I know the positive effect that it’s
going to have on my mood and my mindset.
And then in terms of nutrition, I know my
body, I know what my nutritional needs are
and I’ve gone through those periods of tracking
calories and tracking macros.
So, I basically know which foods contain what
and how much of them I need.
And so, again it’s not even something that
I really think too much about or that I feel
like I have to exert any real willpower to
do.
Not only does it get easier because of the
fact that the training and nutrition habits
themselves start becoming more automatic but
also because as the results start coming in
and you see your body changing from week to
week, that’s going to give you more and
more positive reinforcement which is going
to keep your motivation levels up and give
you the incentive to keep putting in the work.
But even in that area the beginning stages
are the most challenging period because muscle
growth and fat loss are gradual processes
and it takes time to start really seeing significant
changes to your body.
So again, you have to be willing to put in
the work out of the gate and understand that
the process will take time and that it may
require a few weeks just to properly tweak
your program in terms of your workouts and
your nutritional intake to land on a plan
that starts producing results for you.
So, bottom line, if you’re just getting
started and you’re in those beginning stages
where everything is still new and unfamiliar,
just recognize that that just the hardest
things are probably going to get.
It’s not going to be like that forever.
And it will get easier and easier as time
goes on.
Training will start to become an ingrained
habit for you.
Your pain tolerance in the gym will increase.
The form on your exercises will start to become
second nature.
The nutritional aspect will demystify and
you’ll start understanding which foods contain
what and how much you require for your goals.
And if you’re willing to stick it out in
the beginning, you’ll start seeing positive
results which will give you more motivation.
It will gradually start feeding on itself.
And soon enough, it will just be a regular
part of your lifestyle.
And actually it will probably become something
that you actually enjoy.
And from there, you will be well on your way
to your ultimate goal physique.
And you’ll realize that the whole thing
really isn’t that difficult or that complicated
at all.
So, I hope this was helpful.
If you have been struggling to get things
off the ground and you want to grab a fully
structured step-by-step plan to follow, the
workouts, the meal plan, the supplement guides
along with one-on-one coaching so that you
can just put in the work and know that you’re
doing everything properly with no guesswork
involved, then you can download my body transformation
blueprint by clicking here or by heading over
to BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link is in the description box.
Make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe if you haven’t already.
The official blog is over at SeanNal.com.
And you can follow me on social media here.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks again for watching guys and I’ll
see you in the next video.