Whats going on, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video today I want to share with
you a few tips to help you reduce delayed
onset muscle soreness in the days following
your training sessions if this is something
that is an issue for you.
Some people do enjoy the feeling of muscle
soreness because it sort of a reminder of
the hard work they’ve put in.
But for others if the soreness gets excessive
then it can become legitimately uncomfortable
and negatively affect their day-to-day life.
Now, keep in mind that post workout muscle
soreness itself is something that still isn’t
fully understood.
No one knows for sure exactly what causes
it or how it works, and so the solutions for
it also aren’t fully understood.
So I can’t give you exact physical reason
as to how this method might actually work
in reducing muscle soreness, so just think
of them as being some suggestions that you
can experiment with to see what works for
you.
They’re all very easy to implement and you’ll
pretty much get immediate feedback on them
to see if they actually do anything for you.
So it’s not as if you have to invest a bunch
of time and effort here to find out if they
help you anyway.
And also these tips assume that you already
taking care of the basics.
Which means that you’re following a well-balanced
micro nutrient rich diet, you’re eating
enough protein each day, you’re sleeping
properly each night, drinking plenty of water
and you’re not going overboard in terms
of training volume and frequency.
So, five tips to reduce post workout muscle
soreness.
So the first thing, and this not really a
direct actionable tip but it’s definitely
worth mentioning anyway, but that is that
in most cases the newer you are to working
out the more sore you’ll get following workouts.
And as time goes on and you get more accustomed
to training, post workout muscle soreness
will gradually decrease.
And this is called the repeated-bout effect.
It’s not uncommon for complete beginners
to get very sore after workouts, and that
because it’s a brand new stimulus for their
body and it’s something that they aren’t
used to.
I remember for myself when I first started
training and I was doing a squats and leg
presses and deadlifts, and I could literally
hardly even bend out to sit the next day.
Whereas now, I barely got sore at all and
it really isn’t an issue for me.
So the first tip is to just recognize that
muscle soreness will decrease overtime and
to just continue training and gaining more
overall experience.
The second tip is to employ some active recovery
on your off days which is basically just some
very light and easy exercise for whichever
muscle groups are really sore.
And this is a pretty well documented method
that most people will find helpful.
So if it was your leg that was sore then a
bit of cycling either at the gym or on an
actual bike that would work well.
Or you could also use a stair stepper.
For upper body it could be something like
light rowing or swimming.
Or you could literally just use actual barbells
or dumbbells, but just use a very light weight
to get bit of movement in those sore muscles.
Just make sure that with active recovery,
you’re using a very easy pace and not fatiguing
yourself in anyway.
And it doesn’t have to be long either.
Anywhere from about ten to fifteen minutes
that would be a good timeframe.
Another thing you can try is post workout
foam rolling.
Massage is the other option but it’s not
going to be practical for most people to be
going for massage after every workout, so
foam rolling will usually be the more realistic
option.
This is something that you’ll want to do
within at most a couple hours of completing
your workout.
You could try it on you off days but the research
on this was done post workout.
And it doesn’t have to be anything to extensive
either, maybe ten or fifteen minutes of foam
rolling on the specific muscles that you train.
The other thing you can experiment with are
hot/cold showers, they’re also called contrast
showers.
There is some research behind this as well
and it’s basically where after your workout
you’ll take a shower and alternate between
hot and cold temperatures.
Don’t go overboard on the hot temperature,
but just find a level that’s fairly hot
for you but not to where it actually hurts
your skin, and then after that crank it down
to a cold temperature after.
There’s no one exact method for this in
terms of the intervals, but usually will be
something like one to three minutes of hot
water followed by one to three minutes of
old water.
And you could alternate that for about three
or four cycles.
And the final tip to reduce post workout muscle
soreness is citrulline malates supplementation.
Citrulline malate is actually used primarily
as a pre-workout aid, it does have some decent
research behind it in terms of improving training
performance particularly in moderate to higher
rep ranges.
I did a video about this a while back, which
I’ll link in the description box.
But another benefit of citrulline malate that
is research supported is that it reduces delayed
onset muscle soreness, so six to eight grams
of citrulline malate taken thirty to forty
five minutes pre-workout that something you
could experiment with if muscle soreness is
a serious issue for you.
And the added benefit there is that you’ll
also get the performance boosting effects
as well.
So if you’re wanting to lessen the effects
of post workout muscle soreness, those are
five easy tips that you can try out.
The first one is obviously extremely basic,
just stay consistent with your training because
experience alone will have the biggest impact.
But aside from that you can do some active
recovery on your off days, post workouts foam
rolling or massage, hot/cold showers or citrulline
malate supplementation.
Just go ahead and experiment with these and
see which one you find useful.
So thanks for watching guys.
If you’ve found this advice helpful and
you want to get all the tools you need to
gain muscle and lose fat effectively; the
workouts the meal plans, the supplement guides
along with one-on-one coaching then you can
download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video as always make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already, links for that are
also in the description box.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.