Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and the other
day I was going through some files on my computer
here and I actually came across an old article
that I wrote and it was called "The Most Powerful
Muscle Building Tool Available" and this was
actually the very first article I ever wrote
and posted online.
Now obviously my knowlege of training and
nutrition and supplementation has come a very
long way since 2005 and the recommendations
that I give have evolved quite a bit as a
result.
But actually, this one article, the underlying
message of this one article, even though it
was the very first article I ever wrote, I
still think this remains as the single most
important training principle that anyone trying
to build muscle needs to understand and implement.
Now I've been repeating this principle like
a broken record for as long as I can remember
and I really don't think it can be stated
enough.
So today I just kind of wanted to go back
into the archives and basically just read
this article for you because it does contain
a very important message.
Now I will link it in the description box
below so if you want to go read it yourself
you can do that or you can just listen to
this.
I'm just going to read it for you here.
So it's called the Most Powerful Muscle Building
Tool Available.
The bodybuilding debates will never end.
The endless arguments over how an effective
muscle building program should be structured
will likely continue until the end of time.
Just scour the internet message boards, flip
through any muscle magazine or talk to the
sales rep at your local supplement store.
No matter who you talk to or what you read
it seems that everyone is an expert these
days.
If everyone is an expert confident in their
own ideas and beliefs, how can the average
beginner possibly know who to listen to.
He or she is instantly confronted with endless
questions that seem to have no clear cut answer.
How many days should I train per week?
How many sets should I perform for each muscle
group?
What type of rep range should I be using?
What are the most effective exercises for
stimulating muscle growth?
How long should my workouts last.
These questions go on and on until he or she
is eventually led to believe that building
muscle is an infinitely complex process involving
rocket science precision and an intimate understanding
of human physiology.
I mean that's what it takes to build muscle
right?
Wrong!
Believe me, there are answers to these important
questions and if you're willing to put in
the time and effort you most definitely will
find them, but that's not what this article
is about.
You see, amidst all the confusion and endless
debating the majority of lifters end up losing
sight of the big picture.
Beyond all of the specific workout principles,
such as rep range and exercise selection,
remains one crucial principle.
A principle that lies at the very heart of
the muscle growth process.
If this principle is not given full attention
or even worse completely ignored, building
muscle becomes next to impossible.
The bottom line is that muscles grow as they
adapt to stress.
When you go to the gym and lift weights, you
create micro tears within the muscle tissue.
Your body perceives this as a potential threat
to its survival and reacts accordingly by
increasing the size and strength of the muscle
fibers in order to protect against a possible
future attack.
Therefore, in order to continually increase
the size and strength of the muscles you must
focus on progressing each week by either lifting
slightly more weight or performing an extra
rep or two.
In doing this your body will continue to adapt
and grow to the ever increasing stress.
Building muscle is all about building strength.
So what is the most powerful muscle building
tool available?
Quite simply, it's a pen and a piece of paper.
Every time you go to the gym you must write
down exactly what you accomplished and then
strive to improve upon it the following week.
If you aren't always getting better and you're
either staying the same or getting worse.
Every week you should have an exact plan of
attack ready to be executed.
You absolutely cannot afford to start throwing
weights around aimlessly without a clear cut
goal in mind.
The specifics of building muscle are important
to understand and implement, but regardless
of what style of training you're currently
using, the ultimate deciding factor between
success and failure is progression.
You can sit around all day obsessing over
specific principles, but the bottom line is
that if you aren't getting stronger every
week you absolutely will not be getting any
bigger.
Examine your training approach closely.
If you haven't been paying laser-like attention
to the amount of weight you've been using,
the number of reps you've been performing
and then striving with every ounce of your
energy to improve upon those numbers each
week, you are completely ignoring the very
foundation of the entire muscle growth process.
If you want to see the best gains in muscle
mass and strength that you possibly can, a
pen and a piece of paper is the most important
tool you could possibly have in your arsenal.
So that concludes that article.
Again I've been repeating this for years and
years and years.
At the end of the day building muscle ultimately
comes down to progressive overload.
All of the specific individual principles
obviously come into play and they obviously
are important, but none of them are going
to matter if you aren't putting all of your
effort on getting stronger each week by either
lifting slightly more weight or performing
a few more reps with the same weight.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found this article useful here
today.
If you did enjoy this video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
And make sure to join the Facebook page for
daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.