Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, here
of EliteImpactLabs.com. And for anybody who's
looking to burn fat, gain lean muscle and
get into impressive shape, there's pretty
much nothing more annoying than looking down
and seeing the excess fat hanging off of your
midsection. Now, this can be a stubborn area
to lean down. And it's especially difficult
for men because we are genetically programmed
to store a greater percentage of body fat
on our stomachs. And one of the most common
questions that I get asked probably on a daily
basis is how to get rid of that excess stomach
fat as quickly as possible. Now, here's the
simple reality. There are no top secret techniques,
there are no special exercises and there's
no specific dietary protocols that are going
to specifically target the fat around your
midsection. In fact, it's physically impossible
to dictate the precise areas on your body
where fat is burned from. Fat loss only occurs
on a total body scale. As you maintain a
calorie deficit over time, which means that
you're consistently burning more calories
than you consume, you'll lose fat from your
entire body as a whole, your stomach included.
But don't think that as you're performing
your rope crunches and your leg raises, that
you're somehow firming up your stomach and
getting rid of that layer of abdominal fat.
All you're really doing is working the abdominal muscles.
But you're not actually stimulating fat loss
from that specific area. If your goal is to
achieve a set of defined six pack abs, then
yes, a certain level of abdominal development
through resistance training is necessary,
because it's going to create the appearance
of greater ab separation and it's going to
get those abs popping out more noticeably.
However, all of the ab training in the world
isn't going to make a damn bit of difference
if your body fat levels are too high for them
to be visible in the first place. So, if you're
one of the many people who has asked me on
my YouTube comments or on my Facebook page,
how to get rid of stomach fat? The answer
is to simply focus on reducing your overall
body fat percentage through a proper combination
of weight training, cardio, nutrition and
supplementation. A program for losing stomach
fat and for achieving six pack abs is essentially
nothing more than a fat loss program at heart.
Focus on losing 1lbs to 2lbs of fat per week,
which may not sound like a lot, but it actually
adds up very quickly, work hard, stay consistent,
be patient and that stomach fat will gradually
start melting away, along with the fat from
the rest of your body. So, it's really as
simple as that. So, I hope you found this
information useful. If you did enjoy the video,
please make sure to leave a comment, hit the
like button and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos. Also make sure to grab your
free workout plan, meal plan and supplement
guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com. The link
for that is in the description box below.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, for daily videos, articles,
tips and free supplement giveaways. So, thanks
again for watching. And I'll talk to you again
soon.