Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
And in today's video, I want to do a quick
review on beef protein isolate powders.
Now, beef has been a staple in bodybuilder's
diets for decades.
It's packed with valuable muscle building
nutrition coming from high quality protein,
creatine, branched-chain amino acids, B vitamins
and zinc.
And because of the overall quality of beef
as a bodybuilding protein source, supplement
companies are now offering beef protein isolate
in powder form.
And the idea here is to give you all of the
muscle building effectiveness of regular beef,
but in the convenient form of a protein shake.
But is beef protein isolate a good investment?
And how does it compare to regular whey protein?
Well, if beef protein isolate was actually
lean meat in powdered form, then I'd say go
for it.
Unfortunately, most people using these beef
protein powders have no idea what they're
actually made from.
What they really are is essentially the throw-away
parts of the cow; they're joints, ligaments,
connective tissue, hide, ears, et cetera.
Basically, all the parts you end up with after
the butcher is finished with the cow.
And all of these parts are combined to form
a substance called gelatin, which is actually
the primary ingredient found in all of the
popular beef protein powders on the market.
They take the gelatin.
They turn it into a powdered form.
And then they fortify that powder with added
creatine and branched-chain amino acids to
make it seem like you're getting the real
thing.
Now, I'm not saying that this is a health
risk or that it's going to harm you, but the
overall protein quality is nowhere near that
of what you get from a piece of sirloin steak.
Now, if consumed in limited amounts, gelatin
is not going to negatively affect your results.
But why bother?
For around the same price, you can buy a pure
whey protein isolate, which is the highest
quality source of protein you can possibly
put into your body.
Whey, has the highest absorption rate and
the best amino acid profile of any protein
source out there, and is significantly higher
quality than that of gelatin.
So, that's really all there is to it.
If you want a lower quality protein powder
made from cow hoofs and ears, then go ahead
and buy a tub of beef protein isolate.
If you want a pure source of the highest quality
muscle building protein available, and for
the same price, just stick with regular whey.
And if you're allergic to whey, then egg or
casein powders would be your next best choice.
And if you do want to check out a very high
quality, 100% pure whey protein isolate product,
make sure to check out our IsoM3 whey protein
over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link to which is in the description box
below.
So, I hope you found this information useful.
If you did enjoy the video, please make sure
to like, leave a comment and subscribe to
stay up-to-date on future videos.
Also don't forget to grab your free 28-day
mass building plan over at EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook,
where we do free supplement giveaways every
Thursday night.
So, thanks again, for watching.
And I'll talk to you again, soon.