Last video, we overviewed the underlying 
ways in which a muscle can increase in size  
(that is, its cross-sectional area).
As we noted, an increase in 
muscle fiber cross-sectional area  
is likely what commonly drives an increase 
in whole muscle cross-sectional area.
Specifically, there are 3 underlying ways a 
muscle fiber can increase in cross-sectional area:  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, and myofibrillar packing.
Before we review what these are,  
it will be first helpful to briefly 
review the structure of a muscle.
Muscles are organized in hierarchical layers.
Within the whole muscle are fascicles, 
within fascicles are muscle fibers,  
and within muscle fibers are myofibrils.
Myofibrils are where the magic 
of muscle contraction happens,  
they consist of an array of sarcomeres.
Sarcomeres are what generate muscle force.
Specifically, when something called the myosin 
head extends from the myosin filament and pulls  
on something called the actin filament 
towards the M-line, force is generated.
To review the 3 underlying ways a muscle 
fiber can increase in cross-sectional area,  
we need to return to the muscle fiber level.
As we've mentioned,  
muscle fibers contain myofibrils, which are 
what generate force via their sarcomeres.
Everything else within the muscle 
fiber can be considered the sarcoplasm.
The sarcoplasm largely consists of water but 
also contains other components, such as glycogen,  
sarcoplasmic proteins, and 
non-contractile organelles.
Myofibrillar hypertrophy is where the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm grow at the same pace,  
meaning the relative space taken up by the 
myofibrils and sarcoplasm remains the same.
Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is where the sarcoplasm 
grows at a greater pace than the myofibrils,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the sarcoplasm becomes greater.
It's important to emphasize the myofibrils 
have not decreased in size or number.
Rather, the myofibrils could have very well grown,  
but it's just the sarcoplasm 
grew at a faster pace.
Or alternatively, the myofibrils may have not 
grown at all, while the sarcoplasm only grew.
Myofibrillar packing is where the myofibrils 
grow at a greater pace than the sarcoplasm,  
meaning the relative space taken up 
by the myofibrils becomes greater.
Again, it's important to emphasize the 
sarcoplasm has not decreased in size.
One noteworthy point with myofibrillar 
packing is that it's plausible  
myofibrils grow yet do not increase the 
cross-sectional area of a muscle fiber.
Nonetheless, there are two ways I'm aware of  
where myofibrillar packing can increase 
muscle fiber cross-sectional area.
Firstly, it's possible myofibrils can grow 
to the point where they push the outer wall  
of a muscle fiber, thereby creating 
an increase in cross-sectional area.
Or secondly, along with myofibril growth, 
the sarcoplasm does grow to a degree,  
collectively creating an increase in 
muscle fiber cross-sectional area.  
It’s important to emphasize in this scenario, 
although the sarcoplasm grows, myofibril growth  
would outpace the sarcoplasm growth, as this is 
following the myofibrillar packing definition.
In this video, we aim to find out which, in 
any, of these 3 ways of muscle fiber growth  
are most likely behind an increase in whole 
muscle size with typical resistance training.
Moreover, we'll also try to 
assess if there’s a particular  
way you can train for either 
3 of these underlying ways.
By my count, there seem to be three methods 
in which researchers can assess whether  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, myofibrillar packing occurs.
Either by running a long-term 
study with direct assessments,  
a long-term study measuring specific 
tension, or a cross-sectional study.
First, we'll assess how each 
of these three methods works.
Then, we'll directly look at 
the actual studies conducted  
in hope of answering the 
video's primary questions.
Long-term studies that use direct assessments 
have subjects train for some duration.
Before and after this training 
duration, researchers extract  
a sample of muscle from subjects and measure 
the cross-sectional area of the muscle fibers.
Additionally, researchers will calculate or 
estimate the relative space taken up by myofibrils  
and/or sarcoplasm within the samples obtained 
using various methodologies and equipment.
Therefore, in essence, this method enables 
researchers to directly assess if myofibrillar  
hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, 
or myofibrillar packing has occurred.
Now, there is a noteworthy 
limitation with the whole method  
of using a long-term study 
design with direct assessments
It's impossible to assess the 
exact same set of muscle fibers  
from subjects before and after the study.
This is because, before the training 
duration, the muscle fibers are extracted  
and taken out of the subject, meaning that they 
are no longer part of the subject's muscle.
After the training duration, another muscle 
sample is taken from the same region of a muscle.
This may seem like a serious limitation. However, 
the reason this method is considered valid  
is that it's assumed muscle fibers in a particular 
region of a muscle share similar characteristics.
Hence, any alterations in the muscle 
fibers sampled after the study  
should be representative of any 
alterations that would have occurred  
in the muscle fibers that were 
sampled before the training duration.
Moving on, the second way researchers can 
assess changes at the muscle fiber level  
is through long-term term studies 
measuring specific tension.
Like the previous method, 
subjects train for some duration.
Before and after this training 
duration, researchers extract  
a sample of muscle from subjects and measure 
the cross-sectional area of the muscle fibers,  
as well as the specific 
tension of the muscle fibers.
The obvious question here 
is: what is specific tension?
Researchers calculate it by simply diving the 
amount of force a muscle fiber can produce  
by its cross-sectional area.
Therefore, specific tension is the amount 
of force a muscle fiber can produce  
per unit of cross-sectional area.
In a muscle fiber, recall the myofibrils are 
what generate force via their sarcomeres.
On the other hand, the sarcoplasm 
does not generate any force.
So, as specific tension is the amount 
of force a muscle fiber can produce per  
unit of cross-sectional area, and as 
myofibrils are what generate force,  
specific tension ultimately reflects the 
relative space taken up by myofibrils.
Therefore, it follows that an increase in specific 
tension suggests the muscle fibers have more  
relative space taken up by the myofibrils. 
As we know, this is myofibrillar packing.
Opposingly, a decrease in specific tension 
suggests the muscle fibers now have less  
relative space taken up by the myofibrils. 
Indirectly, this also indicates the sarcoplasm  
would now occupy more relative space. As 
we know, this is sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Finally, if specific tension remains 
unchanged to the values from before  
the training duration, this suggests the 
relative space taken up by the myofibrils  
remains the same. As we know, 
this is myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Now, long-term studies measuring specific tension,  
like the last method, require taking a sample of 
muscle before and after the study from subjects.  
As a result, the same limitation is 
present. Namely, It's impossible to  
assess the exact same set of muscle fibers 
from subjects before and after the study.
The final method I'm aware of that researchers can 
use to assess changes at the muscle fiber level  
are cross-sectional studies.
This is where researchers recruit  
different groups of subjects and 
compare characteristics between them.
For example, researchers may recruit 
untrained individuals and bodybuilders.
Then, the researchers may compare not only the 
cross-sectional area of muscle fibers between  
the untrained subjects and bodybuilders but 
also the relative space taken up by myofibrils  
within the bodybuilder's muscle samples to the 
relative space taken up by myofibrils within  
the untrained individual's muscle 
samples, via direct assessments.
Of course, the bodybuilders would 
typically have larger muscle fibers.
But, in a possible scenario, 
the bodybuilder's myofibrils  
make take up less relative space in their 
samples compared to untrained individuals.
From this, we could suggest that perhaps 
bodybuilding style training produces muscle  
fiber growth via sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, as 
the lower relative space taken up by myofibrils  
in the bodybuilders (compared 
to the untrained subjects)  
may be indicative of greater growth of 
the sarcoplasm versus the myofibrils.
Aside from cross-sectional 
studies using direct assessments,  
researchers could instead (or additionally) 
compare the specific tension values of  
muscle fibers between the two groups of subjects.
In a similar scenario, if the muscle fibers 
of bodybuilders had a lower specific tension  
compared to untrained individuals, we may also 
suggest bodybuilding style training produces  
muscle fiber growth by sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, as lower specific tension  
(which we know reflects the relative space taken 
up by the myofibrils) would potentially imply the  
bodybuilders experienced greater growth 
of the sarcoplasm versus the myofibrils.
Now, one of the limitations of 
cross-sectional studies is that  
any differences observed between two groups 
(like untrained subjects and bodybuilders)  
may not necessarily be a result of 
the training differences between them.
For instance, in the hypothetical examples 
given, the bodybuilders had lower relative  
space taken up myofibrils or lower specific 
tension compared to the untrained individuals.
However, these differences may 
not be related to training,  
rather it's quite possible the bodybuilders 
had a lower relative space taken up myofibrils  
or lower specific tension 
before they even began training.
Okay, now we understand the 3 ways 
researchers could go about determining  
how training changes the muscle fiber level, 
let us actually evaluate the current evidence.
In total, I'm aware of 15 long-term 
studies using direct assessments,  
12 long-term studies measuring specific 
tension, and 6 cross-sectional studies.
For myofibrillar hypertrophy, 5 long-term 
studies using direct assessments,  
8 long-term studies measuring specific 
tension, and 2 cross-sectional studies  
find evidence for it (so a total of 15 studies).
For sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, 5 long-term 
studies using direct assessments,  
0 long-term studies measuring specific tension,  
and 2 cross-sectional studies find 
evidence for it (so a total of 7 studies).
For myofibrillar packing,  
5 long-term studies using direct assessments, 
4 long-term studies measuring specific tension,  
and 2 cross-sectional studies find 
evidence for it (so a total of 11 studies).
Therefore, when evaluating the overall 
evidence, myofibrillar hypertrophy is  
just about the most observable way in which 
muscle fibers grow in the current research.
However, let us now overview 
the training variables used  
in these various studies to determine if you can 
specifically train for myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, or myofibrillar packing.
Here is a table listing the long-term 
studies using direct assessments  
that found evidence for myofibrillar hypertrophy.
We'll be using a color code 
to determine what load,  
frequency, and volume the studies 
used. The key can be seen on screen.
As we can see, the majority of these 
long-term studies using direct assessments  
finding myofibrillar 
hypertrophy used moderate loads,  
low-moderate training frequencies, 
as well as low-moderate volumes.
For the long-term studies using specific tension 
that found evidence for myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
the story is the same. That is, the 
majority of studies used moderate loads,  
low-moderate training frequencies, 
and low-moderate volumes.
As for the cross-sectional studies, they 
indicate bodybuilders, powerlifters,  
and recreationally trained men potentially 
experienced myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Now, it's a little more difficult 
to draw any conclusions from this.  
Firstly, there are only two studies. Secondly, 
as we know, cross-sectional studies don't  
include a training duration, they merely compare 
characteristics between two different groups.
That said, the study by Shopea et al. did provide 
some broad training details, which suggest  
the group of recreationally trained men who 
potentially experienced myofibrillar hypertrophy  
were using moderate-heavy loads and moderate 
training frequencies. As for volume, given  
no details on how many exercises they generally 
performed for each muscle group, we don't know.
Nevertheless, to sum up, the research 
finding myofibrillar hypertrophy largely  
used moderate loads, low-moderate training 
frequencies, and low-moderate volumes.
Moving on to sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, 
the majority of the supporting long-term  
studies using direct assessments used moderate 
loads, moderate frequencies, and high volumes.
The high volumes seem to be noteworthy, as 
this is the only training variable that differs  
from the studies that found 
myofibrillar hypertrophy.
Thus, perhaps using higher volumes make it more 
likely you experience sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
However, caution is advised, as only the slightly 
majority (3/5) of the studies used high volumes.
But, I should note that one of the studies 
by Penman, in which low volumes were used,  
should probably be viewed with caution. 
They only had three subjects, no statistical  
analyses were performed, and no fiber or 
whole muscle growth measurement was given.
With this in mind, perhaps the 
argument that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
is made more likely with 
higher volumes is strengthened.
As for long-term studies 
measuring specific tension  
that found sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, there 
are none, so there's nothing to analyze here.
For supporting cross-sectional studies, 
there are two studies finding that  
bodybuilders and powerlifters potentially 
experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Again, it's a little difficult 
to draw any firm conclusions  
from this limited number 
of cross-sectional studies.
But, the study by Meijer et al. found 
that bodybuilders that potentially  
experienced sarcoplasmic hypertrophy were 
performing 4-5 sets with each exercise.  
Assuming they performed multiple 
exercises per muscle group,  
this likely indicates they were 
close to or using high volumes.
Therefore, this cross-sectional 
study may further support the notion  
that high volume may make sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy more likely. However,  
this is tentative, as this is 
only one cross-sectional study,  
and we still cannot be certain on the exact 
number of weekly sets the bodybuilders performed.
Nonetheless, to sum up, the research 
finding sarcoplasmic hypertrophy  
largely used moderate loads, moderate 
training frequencies, and high volumes.
Moving forward to myofibrillar packing, 
the supporting long-term studies using  
direct assessments mainly used moderate loads, 
moderate frequencies, and low-moderate volumes.
For the majority of long-term studies 
measuring specific tension, the same  
training variables were used: moderate loads, 
moderate frequencies, and low-moderate volumes.
As for the cross-sectional 
evidence, two studies found that  
bodybuilders and recreationally trained men 
potentially experienced myofibrillar packing.
Interestingly, one of these studies by D'Antona 
et al. reported the bodybuilders were training  
with 4 to 5 sets per exercise. Assuming these 
bodybuilders performed multiple exercises per  
muscle group, this suggests they 
were perhaps using high volumes.
As a result, this study may go against the notion  
that sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is 
made more likely by higher volumes.
But, as we know, it's a little difficult to draw 
firm conclusions from cross-sectional studies.
Nevertheless, in summary, the majority of the 
research finding evidence for myofibrillar  
packing used moderate loads, moderate 
frequencies, and low-moderate volumes.
Combining our summaries of 
all of the current research,  
it appears volume may be the differentiating 
factor on whether you experience  
myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, or myofibrillar packing.
More precisely, training with 
low to moderate volumes appears  
to be associated with myofibrillar 
hypertrophy or myofibrillar packing.
Now, given the studies that found myofibrillar 
hypertrophy or myofibrillar packing  
used nearly identical training 
variables, it's currently not clear  
whether you can specifically train 
for either. Perhaps it isn't possible,  
or perhaps there are more complex underlying 
factors that just aren't currently evident.
On the other hand,  
training with higher volumes appears to be 
associated with sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
It's important to emphasize that by no 
means are these conclusions definitive.
Particularly, as we know, the interpretation  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is achieved with higher 
volumes is only derived from a few studies.
Although, as we'll establish in 
video 4 of this muscle growth series,  
in which we'll go into more detail behind 
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, there does exist  
a logical rationale behind why high volumes may 
preferentially induce sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Despite this, future research 
will still be valuable  
for providing more clarity on whether high 
volumes truly elicit sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
Another thing that may be 
useful in future research  
is the exploration of training with 
heavy or light loads exclusively.
As was evident when exploring the research, 
nearly every study used moderate loads.
Therefore, we currently don't have 
any direct research exploring whether  
training with light or heavy loads only could 
preferentially elicit myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, or myofibrillar packing.
To conclude and summarize this video, we have a 
fair degree of evidence supporting the existence  
of myofibrillar hypertrophy, sarcoplasmic 
hypertrophy, and myofibrillar packing.
At this time, it's not clear whether 
you can specifically train for either  
myofibrillar hypertrophy or myofibrillar packing,  
but both of these seem to be achieved when 
training with low to moderate volumes.
Conversely, training with higher volumes may 
make sarcoplasmic hypertrophy more likely.
With regards to whether the type of loading 
you use has an impact, the current evidence  
is not sufficient to tell us. Nearly every 
study in this area used moderate loads,  
and this loading produced all the 
3 types of muscle fiber growth.
Future research that uses either 
heavy or light loads exclusively  
should provide clarity on whether these loads can 
preferentially produce myofibrillar hypertrophy,  
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, or myofibrillar packing.
In the next video, we'll be taking a closer 
look at myofibrillar hypertrophy and packing.
More precisely, we'll look out how myofibrils 
may increase in length, cross-sectional area,  
and number, as well as if we can specifically 
train for different types of myofibril growth.