Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here,
with another Muscle in Minutes Q&A, where
I answer your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less.
So, today's question comes from Derek Lau.
And he wants to know what the ideal rep speed
is for stimulating maximum muscle size and
strength?
So, the most important thing to keep in mind
is that on every rep of every exercise you
perform, you're in complete control of the
weight at all times.
The purpose of lifting weights for the sake
of hypertrophy is to put as much direct tension
and overload on the target muscles as possible.
And if you're letting gravity do the work
or if you're lifting ballistically and letting
other muscle groups take over, you're doing
the complete opposite of what you should be.
So, beyond specific speeds, the overarching
principle is that you want to be in complete
control of the weight at all times.
As long as you're doing that in terms of actual
speed, on each rep you have two basic phases.
Obviously, you have the concentric, which
is the lifting portion.
And you have the eccentric, which is the lowering
portion.
Now, the research is pretty clear that in
terms of stimulating optimal size and strength,
explosive concentric are going to be best.
So, on the lifting phase of the rep, you basically
want to move the weight as hard and fast as
you possibly can, while using proper form
and maintaining complete control.
You're then, going to want to pause briefly
into fully contracted position.
And then, you're going to want to lower the
weight in about 3seconds to 4seconds.
The -- remember, the eccentric phase is just
as important as the concentric phase.
And some research actually shows that more
muscle breakdown occurs on the eccentric phase
in comparison to the concentric phase.
So, always remember to lower that weight deliberately
and slowly under strict control.
So, just to wrap that up, lift as hard and
explosively as you can on the concentric,
pause briefly.
And then lower the weight in 3seconds or 4seconds.
So, that's your question answered.
If you have a question that you would like
answered, just head over to the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook using the link in the description
box, and you can leave your question there.
I'll either answer it on the page or I'll
post a video response just like this one.
So, I hope you found this information useful.
Please make sure to comment, like and subscribe.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description box for that.
That includes a free workout, meal plan, and
supplement guide.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page for daily articles, videos and
tips and free supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to your again soon with more
free tips.