What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, RealScienceAthletics.com.
And I just wanted to do a video today addressing
a pretty common question that I get, which
is why I don't post videos of my own workouts
here on YouTube.
And this video isn't just about me, there's
also a larger general point I want to make
here as well, so even if you don't care about
the answer to this, I'd still recommend watching
this video all the way through.
So, the really simple answer to the question
is that I don't post my own workout footage
here, because even though I know that it might
be entertaining for some of my viewers to
see, the truth is that the way I personally
train is not the way I would recommend most
of my viewers train, because my workouts are
customized to me and to my specific situation
and I don't want people to see my training
footage and then just go and copy what I'm
doing since it probably is not applicable
to them.
And I know that's what happens in a lot of
cases for people who subscribe to YouTube
fitness content.
They have a channel that they follow and trust,
they see their workouts, and then they just
copy those workouts even though it's not really
what they should be doing to get the best
results.
And so, not only would a lot of my training
footage not serve you in any real way, but
it could actually be counterproductive.
If you've been following my content for a
while, then you know that I've actually been
doing this whole fitness thing for quite a
long time now.
I've been training seriously since I was 13
years old, so where I'm at now with my training
20 years later in terms of my goals, my preferences,
injury limitations and just how I approach
the whole bodybuilding and fitness thing in
general is not going to be the same as someone
who's in the beginner to intermediate stages
which probably makes up at least 90% of my
audience.
First of all, I don't train for maximum size
and strength at this point.
I did train that way for about 10 years, and
I used to walk around anywhere from about
10-25 pounds heavier than I am now, and I
did want to be as big and as strong as possible
at that time.
But naturally over time, the longer you've
been doing something, often your preferences
and your viewpoints will change, and I just
personally don't desire that anymore.
Okay?
I don't want to have that really bulky appearance,
and I just generally prefer a more middle
ground look.
I can of course coach others on how to achieve
that body builder type of physique if that's
their goal, but my personal workouts and my
diet aren't set up for that.
So that right there already influences my
training to some degree, because I don't need
to train in a way that fully optimizes muscle
growth, and so I can just base more of my
training on personal preference and be a bit
more relaxed with things.
I still do all the basic movement patterns.
I still train hard in the gym.
I'm still very consistent overall.
Don't get me wrong about that, but for example,
since I'm not trying to make my quads as big
as possible and I'm not a power lifter, barbell
back squats just aren't a necessity for me
anymore and so I can pick other movements
that I'd rather do and that are easier on
my lower back, which is an area that has taken
a beating over the years.
Something like a hack squat for example or
a leg press, those are generally my go-to
movements, whereas for someone else who is
wanting to maximize their lower body development
and doesn't have any preexisting injuries,
in that case I would say do barbell squats
if you're able to.
Same thing applies to my weekly training layup.
I don't always train with as much volume or
as much frequency per muscle group, as I might
recommend to someone else who wants to maximize
muscle group, again because I just don't need
to since I'm not trying to maximize muscle
growth and so doing a bit less volume, I can
do that and still maintain the physique I
want, but also be more time efficient and
put less stress on my joints, since training
longevity is a huge thing for me now as I
approach my mid-30s.
And on that same note in terms of injuries,
I've also had a pretty significant one now
for quite a few years called Snapping Tricep
Syndrome, which is basically where the medial
head of my triceps snaps back and forth over
my elbow joint anytime I flex and extend my
triceps.
It's not known exactly what causes it, and
it's only fully correctable through surgery,
but basically what it means is that I can't
do any heavy free weight pressing from my
chest, shoulders, or triceps.
So in terms of heavy push workouts, I have
to make some really significant modifications
and my push workout would not look anything
like a typical push workout that I used to
do or that I would give to someone else who
doesn't have this particular injury.
Okay, my only compound chest pressing free
weight movement is the dumbbell floor press,
because that particular exercise doesn't cause
the snapping because the range of motion is
shorter.
For my shoulders, my vertical pushing movement
right now are actually handstand pushups,
and then for triceps, I can't do any close
grip pressing or dips, and so it's basically
rope push downs and other cable work.
And I can still get the job done with all
of that, based on my goals.
But again, posting a push workout on YouTube
just wouldn't make sense because it wouldn't
serve anyone unless they also have Snapping
Triceps Syndrome like myself.
So, yeah.
That's why for now, I prefer to just stick
to straight informational content on YouTube,
and to coach other people on how to achieve
the physique they want, but I don't post my
own workouts because I honestly feel like
they just might end up misleading people.
I do plan to get back into posting training
demonstrations in the gym showing form cues
and injury prevention tips and things like
that, but in terms of my own training footage,
I do post some shorter workout clips in my
Instagram stories, just showing some individual
lifts but in terms of full length workouts,
that's not something that I bother with for
the reasons that I just gave.
And like I said at the beginning of the video,
this also speaks to a larger point which is
that the points that I just made also apply
to other fitness channels as well, and it's
important that you don't just blindly follow
some workout you see on YouTube or some swipe
workout you see on Instagram just because
it's from someone whose physique you admire.
Because that specific workout or that specific
set of exercises might very well not be ideal
for you.
Keep in mind that anyone with an impressive
physique who you're following here on YouTube
will have already been in the gym for several
years, maybe five, 10 or more.
So the way that they're training now as an
advanced lifter is almost certainly not going
to be optimal for you if you're still in the
first one to three years of training.
Not to mention that their workouts are going
to be customized to them in terms of their
goals, preferences and possible injuries.
So the way that you see them training now
is probably not the way that they trained
in order to build up their initial physique.
Now, I'm not saying that it won't work for
you or it won't produce results, but there
is a decent chance that you'll actually get
better gains by doing something else, probably
something more basic, especially if this is
a typical Instagram workout where they're
just performing a bunch of fancy fluff exercises
just to stand out and get more views.
And that's another thing I see all the time,
someone in the gym who is obviously a beginner
but they're performing a bunch of one arm
kneeling twisting, cable press types of exercises
for their chest instead of just doing a basic
barbell press or dumbbell press.
Or they're doing a bunch of fancy band work
for their glutes instead of just doing squats
and hip thrusts.
And then, when you consider that a lot of
the top fitness YouTubers and Instagrammers
are also enhanced, they're using drugs, and
they're using drugs on top of it, trying to
mimic their workouts is pretty much totally
pointless and almost definitely going to be
counterproductive because those guys will
basically just grow no matter how they train
and they don't even need to have any real
knowledge of exercise science in order to
achieve amazing results.
So they're out there posting videos of their
six-day high volume bro split pump routine
and some beginning lifter goes ahead and tries
that, they try to copy that workout and they
end up getting half the results they'd get
if they just did a basic, full body routine
three days a week or an upper lower split
four days a week.
Now, I can recognize that if you're still
a novice, that it can be pretty hard to decipher
exactly what you should or shouldn't be doing
in the gym.
But the bottom line is that just because someone
out there has an impressive physique and posts
their workouts online doesn't mean that you're
going to get the same results following it
and very often that workout will not be suitable
for you.
That's why I don't post my own personal workout
footage, and instead I just focus on giving
out the proper information that will be applicable
to someone depending on whether they're a
beginner, intermediate, or advanced lifter.
And that's ideally what you should be looking
for, okay?
Not people who just blindly say, "This is
what worked for me, and so it'll work for
you too," but people who actually take the
context into account and give out information
with the understanding that each person's
situation is going to be a bit different and
that things are not perfectly black and white.
If you found this advice helpful and you do
want to learn exactly what I recommend for
you based on your individual body type, goals
and experience level, so that you can achieve
the very best muscle building and fat burning
results in the shortest time, make sure to
take my physique quiz over at Quiz.SeanNal.com
because that'll hook you up with the proper
step-by-step training plan as well as the
proper nutrition plan for you based on your
personal needs.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box below.
On the supplementation side of things, you
can also visit RealScienceAthletics.com to
check out my evidence based no BS supplements
that I personally formulated to help fully
optimize your results including our pre-workout
formula, athlete's multi-vitamin and fish
oil, and you can also use coupon code YOUTUBE10
to save 10% off your entire first order.
And as always guys, make sure to hit the like
button, leave a comment and subscribe below
if you haven't already in order to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Thanks for watching, and I'll see you in the
next one.