Hey, guys, Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here.
And today, I want to answer the very common
question of will eating before bed make you
fat?
Now, I did a video a couple months back, discussing
the issue of whether eating carbs before bed
will increase fat storage and the same basic
logic applies here as well.
The short answer is no.
Having an eating cut off such as not eating
any food after 8:00 pm or avoiding eating
within two hours of sleep or whatever happens
to be is not going to improve your fat burning
results or prevent excess fat storage.
Assuming that you're total energy intake and
your total daily energy expenditure remain
constant, the specific timing or lay out your
meals is not going to make any noticeable
difference from a fat loss perspective.
Fat loss essentially comes down to maintaining
a calorie deficit overtime by burning more
calories than you consume.
So, whether you consume the bulk of your calories
earlier in the day, later in the day, spaced
out all throughout the day, et cetera, as
long as your total calorie expenditure is
controlled, the results are still going to
be the same at the end of the day.
The logic that people follow when avoiding
eating before bed is that since the body is
not active at this time, it's more likely
that those calories will end up as stored
fat.
And it seems to make sense on the surface.
But even if that is true, it's still doesn't
make any difference because the fat that gets
stored at night will inevitably be burned
for energy when the energy demand is higher
the next day.
If you have a daily allotment of 2,500 calories
that you can consume through your diet, and
you're burning 3,000 calories a day, the net
result is still 500 calories burned no matter
what, whether you fast throughout the day
and eat all your calories at night.
Or whether you eat all of your calories earlier
in the day and stop eating after 8:00 pm or
whatever the specific approach happens to
be.
So, the simple answer here is stop torturing
yourself.
Stop the unnecessary self abuse.
Figure out what your daily protein, carbohydrate
and fat needs are, and then, lay your diet
out in a way that maximizes your personal
mood, your energy levels, controls your appetite
and that it fits best into your schedule.
If eating before bed gives you an upset stomach
or makes it hard for you to fall asleep, then
that's fine.
But if you're avoiding eating before bed in
an attempt to increase fat loss, you're really
just wasting your time and your effort.
And making things harder on yourself than
they really need to be.
So, thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your YouTube discount
coupon code in the description box below.
That can be used on all of our premium quality
health fitness and bodybuilding supplements
over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and weekly supplement giveaways.
Thanks for watching this video.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.