Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video I'm going to outline 3 testosterone
boosting supplements that actually work and
I do think are worth looking into.
So for those of you who follow my videos on
a regular basis, the title on this one might
seem a little surprising, because several
months back I uploaded a video explaining
why natural testosterone boosting supplements
are basically a giant scam, and I'll link
that video in the description box below if
you do want to check it out.
And the reason for this is simple: although
some of these compounds such as tribulus,
or maca or fenugreek, d-aspartic acid etcetera,
although some of them might deliver a very
slight increase in your overall testosterone
levels, none of them will actually raise those
levels high enough to have any measurable
impact on your bottom line muscle gains or
fat loss or training performance.
Always remember this, the idea of boosting
testoterone in and of itself means virtually
nothing unless that increase is in a range
capable of affecting your body composition,
and in most cases this will require a boost
of several hundred percent or more.
However, there is one situation in which supplementation
can positively influence testosterone levels
to a degree that will directly improve your
ability to build muscle and burn fat, and
that one situation is when you have a specific
vitamin or mineral deficiency that is causing
your natural testosterone levels to dip below
the normal range.
In this case, supplements can help to bring
your testosterone levels back into proper
balance and offset any negative effects that
your lowered testosterone levels might have
been causing.
So although it isn't possible for you to significantly
increase your testosterone levels to an above
normal range by using natural supplements,
at least not currently, it is possible to
optimize your testosterone levels if they
are currently at a below normal range.
So here are 3 deficiencies that are commonly
seen in hard training lifters and in the general
population overall.
First on the list is magnesium.
People who work out intensely tend to have
lower levels of magnesium because this mineral
is depleted from the body through sweating.
So supplementing with magnesium can help to
restore balanced testosterone levels in those
individuals where a deficiency has been brought
on by consistent hard training.
So the recommended dosage here is going to
be 200 to 400 milligrams of magnesium taken
with a meal in either the form of magnesium
gluconate, magnesium citrate or magnesium
diglycinate.
And magnesium supplementation also has the
added benefit of improving your sleep quality
if you have lower than normal levels.
Second on the list is zinc.
Just like magnesium, zinc is also lost through
your sweat, and people who train intensely
multiple days per week are more likely to
have a deficiency.
So 20 to 30 milligrams of zinc taken with
a meal once per day is a reliable dosage to
bring your levels back into proper balance
and offset any potential testosterone decreasing
effects that it might be causing.
And if you don't sweat alot then I'd recommend
going with a lower dosage of 10 to 15 milligrams
just to be on the safe side.
And third on the list is Vitamin D3.
I covered in length in a previous video, and
again, I'll link this is the description box
below, why most people out there should be
supplementing with Vitamin D3 and optimizing
testosterone levels is just one of the many
reasons.
Unless you live in a very warm climate and
you're spending multiple hours a day outside
in the sun, then there is a very good chance
that your Vitamin D levels are below where
they should be.
Not only can this negatively impact your overall
health, your mood and your energy levels,
but it can also decrease your testosterone
levels as well.
So consuming between 2,000 to 5,000 IU's per
day of Vitamin D3 alongside a meal is a reliable
dosage to get you back into the proper range.
Technically speaking, you would have to get
blood work done in order to determine exactly
how much Vitamin D that you should be supplementing
with daily, however, the risk of Vitamin D
toxicity is very low with the available research
showing around 10,000 IU's to be the safe
upper limit.
So if you're working out intensely multiple
days per week and especially if you sweat
alot and also if your work a strenuous job,
then these 3 supplements are something that
might be worth looking into.
You can purchase all of them separately on
their own, or you can simply go with a high
potency multivitamin, my top recommendation
being Life Force Multiple and I will also
link that in the description box below if
you want to check it out, however, do keep
in mind that the multivitamin is only going
to provide you with the bottom end of the
recommended dosages for each of the compounds
that I outlined.
So although these supplements are not going
to raise your testosterone levels to an above
normal level, they will help to ensure that
your testosterone levels and your resulting
muscle gains and fat loss are operating at
their natural peak.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found the information useful.
If you did enjoy the video as always, please
make sure to to hit the LIKE button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com by clicking
the icon up at the top of the video or using
the link in the description box below.
Talk to you again soon.