What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
Sorry if the lighting is a little bit dark
here, but in this video today we're talking
about one of the biggest challenges natural
lifters often face, especially those who want
to stay relatively lean as well, which is
the fact that when you're wearing a tank top
or you're shirtless you're going to have that
nice impressive muscular look but then once
a regular shirt goes on over top it basically
eats you alive and leaves you looking like
you don't even lift.
Now obviously that's a bit of an exaggeration
but there's no question that you will tend
to look quite a bit different shirtless versus
wearing a shirt.
Because in clothes most of your muscle definition
gets hidden and if you're maintaining a lean
body fat percentage then you actually won't
be that objectively big in the first place,
and so clothes can really shrink you down
if you don't dress yourself properly or build
your physique properly.
So in this video I'm going to give you a few
basic tips you can use to look bigger in a
shirt and maximize your overall muscularity
in clothes.
Before I dive into it, if you do enjoy this
content don't forget to hit the subscribe
button below to stay updated on all of my
future videos, and make sure to click the
little bell symbol as well.
That way you'll be notified whenever a new
video is available.
So the first question is: which muscle groups
are going to be the most important to develop
to really make your upper body look bigger
and more muscular in clothes.
Now, this is kind of a tough question to answer
because every muscle group is ultimately important
in bringing your whole physique together.
And if you're still a beginner or an intermediate
then you should be training everything equally
anyway.
But if I had to focus in on a certain area
I'd say that your delts and upper back are
probably going to have the biggest overall
impact on giving you that wider more muscular
appearance in clothes.
The difference between having flat narrow
delts versus rounder more pronounced delts
is pretty significant in terms of the overall
size that it'll give your upper body.
So make sure your delt training is dialed
in, the most important areas there being the
lateral and the posterior heads because those
are the heads that are going to produce that
round 3D look.
And I did a video on that previously that
I'll link in the description box below if
you want to check out my top recommended exercises
for effective delt training.
And then for upper back, things like shrugs,
face pulls, deadlifts or rack pulls, those
are all going to hit your upper back nicely
as well.
I mean, so will rowing exercises as well if
you pull the weight higher up more toward
your chest area rather than down towards your
waist.
Arms are obviously important too so we can't
you know exclude those especially if you're
wearing shorter sleeves.
And one area that sometimes gets overlooked
is the long head of the tricep which really
adds a lot of mass to your upper arm on the
backside.
And you can specifically focus on the long
head by doing overhead tricep extension exercises.
And then one final area that also tends to
get neglected but that will make you look
decently bigger in a shirt is having a thicker
neck.
Now, this is an area I used to train back
in my heavier bodybuilding days.
I've admittedly been neglecting it in recent
years and it does show.
I'm personally not really into the bulkier
look anymore though my neck could still use
some work regardless since it is naturally
thinner, but yeah, having a thicker neck definitely
does make a noticeable difference in clothes.
And if I look back at older pictures of myself
and I can really see the difference actually.
So maybe that is something that I will add
back into my plan soon.
But in any case, deadlifts or rack pulls as
well as shrugs those are going to increase
your neck size by training the levator scapulae
muscles.
And then if you really want to hone in on
your neck more closely, if it is naturally
thin, then you can also train your neck flexors
and your neck extensors by lying on a bench
and doing neck curls or neck extensions.
So that's, sort of, the muscle building side
of it.
Every muscle group is important but those
are the main ones that contribute the most
when you're wearing a shirt, I would say.
Now, aside from that you also have to pay
attention to your actual clothing choices
because this can have a big effect between
just looking average versus really showing
off your physique nicely.
So the first thing is to buy properly fitted
clothes, which seems obvious but it's still
something that a lot of guys really miss the
boat on.
If your shirt is too loose and too baggy then
your muscles are obviously going to be more
covered up and if it's too tight then it's
just not going to look good and as well, if
it's too tight it could actually make you
look smaller if you are fairly lean.
So you ideally want to land somewhere in the
middle, meaning a shirt that's snug and form-fitting
where your muscle definition is visible.
It should be hugging your shoulders and arms
but not over-the-top and excessively tight.
And you also want the shirt to be a bit more
snug around the waist area as well rather
than just hanging down all loose and baggy
because by having it tighter it's going to
give you the appearance of a smaller waist
and that's going to accentuate that v-taper
look and make your shoulders look wider, and
tighter fitting v-necks are a really good
choice for this, by the way.
Another thing to pay attention to is the length
of your sleeves because this can really affect
how big or how small your arms look.
If the sleeve comes down too far and it covers
most of your upper arm then they're going
to look a lot smaller, whereas a sleeve that
cuts off higher up, maybe like an inch or
two below your delts, that's going to make
your arms look a lot bigger since more of
your biceps and triceps are going to be visible.
And then if you really want to take this a
bit further you can also look at the color
of your shirts.
That's because dark colors are technically
more slimming.
This isn't something I personally worry about.
Black is actually my favorite color.
It's what I wear most often but if you do
want to fully maximize how big you look, lighter
colors, especially white, will technically
make you look a bit bigger overall.
And then aside from your muscular development
and your clothing choice, another big thing
to consider is your body fat percentage.
So keep in mind that if you're going for that
leaner more aesthetic look by trying to keep
your body fat more toward the low “teen-area”,
so around twelve percent or so, you're probably
going to look more muscular and more impressive
with your shirt off or in a tank top but you're
going to look smaller in clothes since you
won't be as big overall.
Whereas if you go a little bit higher, maybe
closer to fourteen or fifteen percent, you'll
lose some of that muscle definition but your
physique is going to look thicker and fuller
and you'll look more muscular in clothes.
So you really have to find the right balance
for yourself depending on your personal preference.
And for those guys who really want that bulkier
sort of bodybuilder/power lifter type of look,
going even higher at around seventeen or eighteen
percent is still acceptable.
You know, as long as you're still within a
healthy body fat range, which would be anything
below about twenty percent for men, from there
it just comes down to personal preference.
So if you do want to look more muscular in
clothes and that's more important to you than
looking aesthetic with your shirt off then
increasing your calorie intake slightly and
carrying a bit more body fat, you know, more
overall water retention more glycogen, that's
going to fill your physique out more noticeably.
And then one final thing to take into consideration
as well is your posture.
Now, I'm not saying to go over-the-top with
this and develop exaggerated posture and turn
it to one of those dudes shredding around
on the street with imaginary lat syndrome
all day, but maintaining proper posture with
your chest up, your shoulders back, you're
head in a neutral position, arms at your sides,
that's going to help to accentuate your appearance
as well in comparison to having closed off
posture, you know, with your shoulders hunched
forward and your head hang forward.
Not to mention that that's just better for
your body anyway.
So to quickly sum this up, if you want to
maximize your appearance in clothing and look
bigger in a shirt, every muscle group is important
but some of the ones that really stand out
in a shirt are your delts, upper back, neck
and arms.
You also want to wear clothes that are form-fitting
but not too tight.
Slightly shorter sleeves.
Lighter colors.
Don't try to get too lean because you'll lose
muscle fullness, which will really come through
in clothes.
And make sure to maintain proper open posture
as well throughout the day.
All of these things along with just having
a well-developed physique in general that's
going to accentuate your appearance in clothes
and show off your physique as nicely as possible.
So I hope this was helpful, guys.
If you want to grab my complete step-by-step
plan that will show you how to fully optimize
your gains and look great both in a shirt
and without one, the workouts, nutrition guidelines,
recommended supplements along with one-on-one
coaching, then you can grab my complete Body
Transformation Blueprint by clicking the little
icon at the top of the screen here, or by
heading over to www.BTBlueprint.com.
The link is in the description box.
If you've enjoyed the video make sure to hit
the like button, leave a comment and subscribe.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And make sure to follow me on Facebook and
Instagram as well, the links for that are
also in the description box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll talk to you again soon.