Hey, guys, Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here.
And today, I want to cover the topic of proper
pre-workout nutrition, and what the best nutritional
approaches to follow prior to your weight
training workout.
So, a proper pre-workout meal should accomplish
two basic things.
The first is that it should maximize performance
during the training session.
And this is the single most important factor
because if your strength and energy levels
are near their peak while you train, you're
going to be able to create the most powerful
muscle building growth stimulus possible during
your workout.
And the second is to provide your body with
the raw materials needed to assist muscle
recovery and growth for when the session is
over.
Now, most people will generally consider that
to be the job of their post-workout meal,
but because nutrient absorption is such a
gradual process in the first place, it's actually
the nutrients from your pre-workout meal that
are being broken down and absorbed after your
training session is over.
So, let's break this down into simple terms
here.
The first issue is what should you eat?
So, an effective pre-workout meal really doesn't
need to be fancy or complicated in any real
way.
And a basic combination of high quality protein
and carbohydrates will easily get the job
done here.
The protein will provide your body with the
amino acids that are needed to support muscle
recovery and growth following the workout.
And the carbohydrates will provide your muscles
and brain with the energy that you need to
optimize your gym performance.
For protein, any high-quality source is going
to be fine.
Whey protein is what I consider ideal because
it's very light on your stomach and it's high
in branched-chain amino acid content.
But if you prefer chicken, or fish or red
meat, that's fine too.
For carbohydrates, a minimum of 20grams to
30grams from any basic source will also be
fine.
Fruit, pasta, oatmeal, rice, it's really up
to you here.
Two other quick points to take into consideration;
Number one, I would generally recommend that
you keep the fat content of your pre-workout
meal on the lower-end.
And that's because fats actually slow down
the movement of foods from your stomach to
your small intestine, and that can increase
the chances of feeling bloated and sluggish
during your workout which is obviously not
what you want.
And secondly, I typically don't recommend
that you train in a fasted state.
Now, some people swear by fasted training.
But for most people in most situations, a
pre-workout meal is going to maximize overall
workout intensity and performance.
It's going to ward off potential unwanted
muscle loss.
And it's also going to increase post-workout
fat burning by increasing thermogenesis.
That said, if you do prefer fasted training
for whatever reason, I would highly recommend
that you consume about 10grams or more of
a BCAA supplement prior to the session in
order to maximize performance since you're
not going to be consuming any carbohydrates
at that time.
And branched-chain amino acids do have performance
benefits in this particular situation.
Now, technically that means that you'll no
longer be truly fasted, because BCAAs do have
caloric value, but you get the idea.
And the second issue is when should you consume
your pre-workout meal?
The specific time that you consume your pre-workout
meal is largely an issue of personal preference.
The bottom line is to eat your pre-workout
meal at whatever time allows for the best
strength, and energy and stomach comfort for
you.
So, for most people around 1.5 to 2 hours
pre-workout is going to be best.
And if you prefer it, an even longer time
frame is also fine.
Any sooner than that, and there's a pretty
good chance that you're going to end up feeling
bloated or even borderline nauseous during
the session, and that's because intense training
causes your body to divert blood away from
the stomach and into the working muscles.
And as a result, any food in the stomach is
just going to sit there undigested.
So, for that reason, consuming a plate of
chicken and rice 30 minutes before hitting
the gym is probably not going to be the best
idea.
And waiting about an 1.5 to 2 hours is going
to work much better for most people.
So, that's really all there is to it here.
Number one; consume a high quality protein
and carbohydrate source around 1.5 to 2 hours
prior to your workout.
And if you prefer to wait longer, that's also
fine.
Number two; keep the fat content of the meal
on the lower-end.
And number three; unless you have a highly
specific reason to do so, avoid fasted training
if possible.
But if you do want to train without consuming
food, make sure to take in at least 10grams
of a branched-chain amino acid supplement
instead.
So, I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful.
As always, if you did like the video please
make sure to leave a comment, hit the like
button and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free 28-day mass
building plan, using the link in the description
box below.
That includes a free workout plan, meal plan
and supplement guide.
And make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page for free daily articles, videos,
tips and muscle building supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.