What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here; www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
And in this video here I want to talk about
one of my biggest pet peeves in the fitness
industry.
I have a lot of different ones, but this is
definitely right up there and that pet peeve
is the average run of the mill personal trainer
at your typical big box gym.
Now, don’t get me wrong, there are plenty
of good personal trainers out there who are
physically fit and who know what they’re
talking about who do provide good service
to their clients, so I’m obviously not talking
about everyone here.
But I do feel pretty comfortable in saying
that far more personal trainers than not are
going to be a waste of time and a waste of
money for the average beginner trying to get
into shape.
They probably have good intentions but most
typical personal trainers are just not very
knowledgeable when it comes to training and
nutrition, and they end up stirring their
clients down the wrong path and they do it
while charging upwards of $50 or more per
hour, which is not cheap and which does add
up a lot over the long term.
The average beginner probably doesn’t realize
this but getting a personal training license
really doesn’t require much and it should
be a lot more difficult than it is.
The terms certified personal trainer might
sound fancy to someone who’s just starting
out.
You know, they got the uniform and the name
tag, and it all looks nice and professional
but the truth is that all it really takes
is memorizing some very basic information
over a few weekend courses.
A lot of which is probably outdated information
anyway, and anyone out there can very easily
become a certified trainer regardless of their
actual knowledge or their experience level.
You could honestly spend few days or a week
conducting your own research on Google and
YouTube, and as long as follow the right sources
you could easily learn everything that the
average personal trainer knows and more all
on your own.
I’ve spent endless hours in a ton of different
gyms throughout my life and you just see the
same basic things over and over again no matter
what gym you go to.
And I personally find it really frustrating
because you have a fitness beginner who is
obviously serious enough about wanting to
get into shape to actually go out and hire
a trainer for it, or maybe they just felt
pressure into doing it by the sales people
at the gym but they don’t realize that the
actual guidance they’re being given probably
ranges from bad to really bad in most cases.
You know, you’ll see a trainer standing
there counting reps while their clients does
squats or dead lifts using terrible form,
you’ll see a woman who is 150 pounds overweight
being take through an arm isolation workout,
you’ll hear a completely outdated nutrition
advice with trainers telling their clients
to avoid carbs or that they have to eat six
clean meals every two to three hours, you’ll
see skinny guys who’re trying to gain muscle
being put through light circuit training style
workouts, just everything imaginable that
is so far less than optimal.
And I know this all might sound a little harsh
or over the top, but it’s honestly the way
it is.
And for those watching who do have decent
fitness knowledge and experience then you
know exactly what I’m talking about.
So please go ahead and comment if you know
what I’m talking about to back me up here.
But yeah, this is exactly why you’ll notice
that a very high percentage of the clients
that you see coming back to the gym week after
week after week, never really seem to change
all that much even though they are putting
the effort in at the gym.
And it’s also why a large percentage of
trainers themselves aren’t even in really
good shape.
I mean, really, if you take a look around
at the average gym it’s actually fairly
rare to see a personal trainer who’s actually
in legitimately impressive shape.
And I recognize that being in shape doesn’t
necessarily mean that you’re knowledgeable
in the subject and vice versa, but I think
if you’re going to be paid to teach people
how to build muscle and how to lose fat then
you should lead by example.
At the very least if you’re a trainer who
isn’t currently in the best shape then you
should at least be someone who is made considerable
progress from where you started.
I’m not saying you need to be shredded by
any means, but you shouldn’t blatantly be
overweight or out shape which many trainers
are.
So, if you’re a beginner and you’re looking
to hire a trainer to start you off on the
right foot or just to have someone to be accountable
to, at the very least you should do some research
first to make sure you’re working with someone
who really does know what they’re doing,
and who’s going to be worth the money for
you.
If, they’re promising you any sort of over
the top results then you’ll immediately
want to stay in the clear.
Most beginners are not going to gain any more
than about half a pound of muscle per week
in their first year of training in the best
case scenario.
And losing any more than around two pounds
of fat per week consistently, if cutting is
your goal, that’s not going to happen over
any lengthy span of time unless you’re significantly
over weight in which case it might be possible.
But for most people around 1 to 2 pounds per
week is a reliable guide lines.
So, ask what sort of results you can expect
to achieve and if the numbers fall any where
far outside of those ranges then that trainer
either doesn’t know what they’re talking
about or they’re deliberately overpromising
just to get your business.
You also ask them what type of workout plan
they put you on.
If it’s not a basic routine that centers
around heavy compound exercises at a relatively
high intensity with the focus on progressive
overload, hitting each muscle at least twice
per week because if you’re a beginner, assuming
you probably are if you’re looking for a
trainer then you’ll want to target each
muscle at least that often.
Again, if the training guidelines fall very
far outside of that, then you’re not going
to end up with an optimal plan.
If, as a beginner, they have you on some crazy
workout plans and using things like super-sets
and drop-sets, a ton of isolation exercises
or some sort of weight training cardio-hybrid,
again, you’re going to be wasting your time
and money there.
They also shouldn’t be over-emphasizing
cardio either.
Weight training should always form the basis
of your workout routine with only moderate
amount of extra cardio added in.
but most definitely not the four or five days
plus per week that a lot of trainers will,
just sort of, aimlessly recommend.
On the nutrition end, if they’re giving
you outdated advice saying you have to eat
perfectly clean seven days a week, you can
never eat any sort of cheat foods, you can
never drink alcohol, you have to eat every
two to three hours or that you need to follow
some sort of restricted eating plan like low
carb, or paleo, or gluten free, again, that
trainer really doesn’t know what they’re
talking about.
They should be able to explain the basics
of calorie and macro nutrient intake to you
in relation to your goals, they should understand
the concept of flexible dieting and they should
have you on a well-balanced plan where you’re
eating the right quantity of nutrient dense
whole foods a good percentage at a time, but
that also incorporates some flexibility so
that you can fit in your favorite foods in
moderation as well.
And don’t forget to asks about supplements
too, because if they’re anything but a supplement
minimalist, especially given that you’re
probably a beginner, again they’re stirring
you down the wrong path and you’re just
going to end up wasting even more money in
addition to what you already spending for
the training services; a basic whey protein
powder, creatine, fish oil, multivitamin,
maybe a basic pre-workout, anything much beyond
that is not going to be necessary.
So if they start mentioning things like fat
burners or glutamine or BCAAs or testosterone
boosters, especially if they’re being sold
through the gym and that’s going to be another
massive red flag for you.
So again, I know that there are a lot of great
personal trainers out there, people who know
more than I do and who are in better shape
than I am, so if you’re someone out there
who is providing legit training service then
I give all the credit and this isn’t directed
at you.
And you know exactly what I’m talking about
in this video anyway.
However, the simple truth is that the average
run of the mill personal trainer is hugely
over charging you for what would be at best
a far less than ideal program and at worst
possibly even a counter-productive program.
So if you’re a beginner who wants to work
out with a trainer, don’t just assume certified
personal trainer is all you need to look for,
and you should be doing extensive research
first before you decide to work with someone
because you’re going be putting the time,
you’re going to be putting in the effort
and your result will basically be in their
hands.
So thanks for watching, guys.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
You can follow me here on social media if
you aren’t already the link is in the description
box.
If you want to skip the personal training
step altogether and just get all the no B.S.,
science-based tools you need to lose fat and
gain muscle as effectively as possible including
step-by-step workouts, meal plans, supplement
guides and one-on-one e-mail coaching then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
And feel free to like share comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll talk to you again soon.