Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I’m going to be sharing
with you one of the very best bicep curl variations
available to help you build your upper arms
as efficiently as possible, and that exercise
is the standing single arm cable curl.
So free weight curls using barbells and dumbbells
are really good exercises overall, but they
do have one slight disadvantage in that they
don’t put your biceps under the maximum
amount of tension possible throughout the
entire range of motion from bottom to top.
And that's because the exercise is performed
in a circular motion, but the force of gravity
is always pulling the weight in a straight
line towards the ground.
So because of that, the biceps are hit with
a very high degree of stress at the top of
the curl and down to kind of the middle portion
of the range, but they increasingly lose tension
as the weight is lowered down past halfway
and towards the bottom position.
Now this is nothing too serious, and free
weight curls are still great exercises to
include in your overall plan, but if you do
want to try out a bicep curl variation that
gives you a better overall resistance curve
and that keeps your biceps under non-stop
stress without any rest at all from the top
of the curl all the way to the bottom, then
the single arm cable curl is going to be the
best way to do that.
So here’s how to perform them properly.
So, using a single-hand attachment, place
the pulley at the very bottom of the cable
machine.
Stand facing away from the machine, grab the
handle and then take a small step forward
so that the resistance is pulling slightly
back on your arm as you're standing in the
starting position.
Place your opposite hand on your waist for
balance, and with your knees slightly bent,
your arm fully straightened and your elbow
tucked at your side, curl the cable up while
keeping your wrist in a neutral or slightly
extended position.
Make sure to keep your shoulder positioned
down and back, and aside from some very slight
movement, try not to allow your elbow or your
shoulder to drift forward or your back to
sway as you curl the weight up.
Continue the motion until you feel a strong
contraction in your bicep, pause briefly at
the top, and then lower the weight back down
following the same path.
The reason this specific bicep curl variation
offers an advantage over regular free weight
curls is because the resistance not only pulls
your bicep downward, but it also pulls it
backward as well, and as a result, you're
going to end up with full bicep activation
not only in the top half of the range of motion,
but in the entire bottom half as well since
your bicep has to be constantly working in
order to hold your arm forward.
Now you can either perform your single arm
cable curls as the primary bicep exercise
in your bicep training routine, or you can
just mix them into your overall plan along
with your other free weight lifts.
These are a really great way to hammer your
biceps in a way that most other lifts don’t
provide, and I’d highly recommend giving
them a try and seeing what you think.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
For more science-based, no B.S workout tips
to help you gain muscle and lose fat at your
maximum potential, along with step by step
training routines, meal plans and supplement
guides, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System by clicking the icon at
the top of the video or using the link in
the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.