Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in today’s video I want to talk a little
about the issue of using supplement research
studies vs. your own personal experience when
trying to decide which muscle building and
fat burning supplements to either include
or not include in your program.
So over the past few years I’ve put out
quite a number of different bodybuilding supplement
reviews where I try to give the most unbiased
and most objective information that I can
on different products that claim to build
muscle and burn fat.
And any time one of my reviews portrays a
particular supplement in a negative light,
it always ends up being met with a certain
amount of criticism from the people who personally
use that product and who swear by its effects.
Now this is totally fine and is to be expected,
but I find that I always hear the same sort
of things over and over again like, you know
“I don’t care what the studies say, I
used tribulus and it definitely worked for
me” or you know “you can’t say anything
about buffered creatine until you’ve tried
it for yourself” etcetera etcetera.
Now I obviously understand where these people
are coming from, however, the truth is that
there are a couple of real fundamental problems
with relying solely on your own “personal
experience” to basically gauge the effectiveness
of a natural supplement that claims to help
you build muscle or burn fat at a faster rate.
Now the first problem is the basic placebo
effect.
Now this is much more powerful than you might
think and it comes into play big time whenever
you consume a particular supplement with the
positive expectation that it’s going to
work for you.
By simply believing that the supplement is
going to produce beneficial effects, either
due to the marketing behind the product, or
you know, firsthand reports that you've heard
from other people or just from your basic
desire to have it work, it’s very easy to
convince yourself that, your “muscles look
fuller” or your “abs look leaner” or
that your “recovery has improved” as a
result of using it, even if it hasn’t had
any measurable impact at all.
Always remember that our own perception of
our bodies is directly connected with our
personal beliefs, and so this can happen very
easily without you even realizing it.
The placebo effect is a very well documented
phenomenon, and we’re all susceptible to
it in one way or another.
And the second obstacle is the very slow and
very gradual nature of naturalmuscle growth
and fat loss.
Like I covered in a video last week, in the
typical “best case” scenario, a natural
trainee can probably expect to gain around
half a pound of new lean muscle tissue per
week.
And this assumes that they’re a complete
beginner, that they have decent muscle building
genetics and that they're doing everything
correctly in terms of training and nutrition.
And for each year of consistent lifting that
passes, that rate of muscle growth will decrease
by about half.
So, let’s assume that very best case scenario
of half a pound of muscle per week combined
with the use of a supplement that claims to
increase your rate of muscle growth by 20%.
And keep in mind that I’m also being VERY
generous here, because the truth is that there
is no natural muscle building compound out
there that is going to deliver gains anywhere
close to that anyway.
So this means that after 3 months of training
without using the supplement, you would expect
to gain around 6 pounds of new lean muscle,
and by adding that supplement into your plan
you would gain an additional 1.2 pounds of
muscle on top of that.
The reality is that there is no way under
any realistic scenario that any trainee is
going to be able to accurately account for
an extra 1.2 pounds of muscle over the course
of 3 months (which is also equal to 1/10th
of a pound of muscle per week) as a result
of adding that new supplement into their program.
Unless you’re living in a vacuum and you're
controlling every other variable of your program
perfectly, from training to nutrition to your
sleeping habits to all of your other day-to-day
activities, and you’re able to measure your
body composition with a very high degree of
accuracy, so your gains in lean muscle vs.
your body fat, then considering the very modest
effects of even the very best most scientifically
backedsupplements out there, you really have
almost no way of measuring the specific long
term effects of any specific muscle building
compound that you add into your program.
And although fat loss does occur at a reasonably
quicker pace than muscle growth does (around
1-2 pounds of fat loss per week, that's probably
a realistic rate for most people), it would
still be extremely difficult to accurately
measure this for most people.
So considering the two points that I just
outlined, this is why supplementation is typically
best thought of as a game of making “educated
guesses”, and this is exactly why concrete
research studies really DO matter and why
they should be taken into account when you're
deciding which supplements to include or not
include in your overall program.
Obviously many of these studies do have their
own limitations, but they’re still the best
tool that we have in order to get a objective,
concrete look at how these various supplements
work across large groups of people and without
our own biases getting in the way.
In any case, the main point that I want to
get across here is that, when you do find
some new supplement that you feel might be
worth trying out, do your research first.
Don’t automatically take the attitude of
you know “I’ll just try it out and see
how it works for me”.
Instead, first take a look at the label and
check out what specific ingredients are included
and at what specific dosages.
Don’t take the marketing points seriously
that the company puts out, since more often
than not they’ll either be hugely over-hyped
or they'll just be downright false altogether.
Run a Google search to see what the ingredients
are, what they’re supposed to do, what the
proper dosages are and what studies are available
in order to support their use.
Use a free resource like Examine.com that
combines tens of thousands of supplement studies
into one place for easy use and do some research
there.
Or another option is to purchase their complete
Supplement Goals Reference Guide or their
Supplement Stack Guides to make the process
even easier for you, and I’ll link those
in the description box below if you want to
check them out.
If you have a particular set of people that
you look to for bodybuilding advice and who
you know base their recommendations on concrete
science and research, then see what they have
to say about it.
If you want to go straight to the source and
actually look up the researchstudies for yourself,
then head over to somewhere like PubMed (and
I’ll link that in the description box below
as well) and punch in the specific compounds
that you’re interested in to see if you
can find any information there.
When you consider how much money any given
supplement can actually end up costing you
when used over the long term (for example,
$40 a bottle once a month, that's going to
cost you nearly 500 bucks at the end of the
year), then you owe it to yourself to make
sure that you’re investing that money wisely
and with good reason to do so.
Bottom line here, aim to be as objective as
possible when making your supplement choices,
since the reality is that the vast majority
of them won’t actually do much for you in
the first place, but they will usually end
up costing you quite a bit of money when you
use them over the long term.
So thanks a lotfor watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to get a ton of other no B.S,
science-based muscle building and fat burning
tips in order to maximize your progress in
and out of the gym, make sure to head over
to BodyTransformationTruth.com and grab my
complete “Body Transformation Blueprint”
System and you can do that by clicking the
icon at the top of the video or using the
link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.