In the last few videos, we've been going 
into detail with rep ranges. We've evaluated  
if one rep max training can be effective for 
building muscle, if reps between 2 and 4 
can maximize hypertrophy, and what load may be 
too light to maximize hypertrophy. I've created  
a rep range playlist from where you can find 
these videos. In this video, we'll explore if  
performing different rep ranges in your training 
program can help build more muscle compared to  
using only one rep range. Theoretically, different 
rep ranges could target different muscle fibers.  
Muscles are generally made up of slow twitch and 
fast twitch fibers. Given, slow twitch muscle fibers  
are highly resistant to fatigue and produce low 
amounts of power, it's suggested higher repetitions  
would grow these fibers more than lower 
repetitions. Conversely, given fast twitch muscle  
fibers are less fatigue resistant but produce 
higher amounts of power, lower repetitions could  
grow these fibers more than higher repetitions. 
However, when repetitions are performed to  
or very close to failure, the point at which 
you can't perform any more repetitions, the
evidence does not support this. A meta-analysis by 
Jozo Grgic combined the results of 5 studies  
looking at this area. In these 5 studies, the 
higher repetition groups used loads ranging from  
30% to 50% of their one 
rep max on an exercise. rResulting in around 20  
to 40 repetitions to failure each set. The lower 
repetition groups used the loads ranging from 75  
% to 90% of their one rep max on an exercise. 
Resulting in around 3 to 10 repetitions to  
failure each set. Combining the results of the 5
studies, growth of slow twitch muscle fibers was  
similar between the higher repetition and lower 
repetition groups. Likewise, growth of fast twitch
muscle fibers were similar between the higher 
repetition and lower repetition groups. Now, in this  
meta-analysis, the 95% confidence intervals were 
wide. Essentially, meaning we should approach these  
results with some caution. More research in the 
future will still be helpful. Nevertheless, the idea  
that higher and lower reps do a similar job at 
growing slow twitch and fast twitch muscle fibers,  
provided those reps are performed to or very 
close to failure, would make sense. Muscle fibers  
are recruited in a progressive sequence. During 
low effort tasks, slow twtich muscle fibers are  
recruited. But as your effort increases, faster 
twitch muscle fibers are gradually recruited.  
When using heavier loads and therefore lower 
repetitions, many slow twitch and fast twitch  
fibers are going to be initially recruited, as your 
effort is high straight away. As you near failure,  
more fast twitch fibers are probably recruited 
to some degree as well. When using lighter loads  
and therefore higher repetitions, the reps 
are going to be fairly low effort initially.  
But as you continue and get closer and closer to 
failure, your effort increases. As a result, research  
indicates you ultimately end up with many slow 
twitch and fast twitch muscle fibers recruited,  
probably similar to what you achieve with heavier 
loads. So, the current evidence leans towards  
the idea that higher or lower repetitions 
do not stimulate different muscle fibers.  
However, another potential reason behind why 
you may want to use different rep ranges  
relates to the activation of proteins. At the 
cellular level, muscle protein synthesis, so the  
creation of the proteins that make our muscles 
bigger, can be traced back to the interaction of  
proteins in a chain like reaction. Lifting weights 
kicks off this interaction of proteins. Due to the  
differences in metabolic and mechanical stress 
between different rep ranges, they could activate  
different proteins. Therefore, using different 
rep ranges could be beneficial. Some research  
has indeed found that low and high reps result 
in the activation of different proteins. However,  
there is also research finding this not to be the 
case. So it's not completely clear. Nonetheless, let  
us now move on to the actual research exploring 
if using different rep ranges builds more muscle  
versus using only one rep range. Schoenfeld and 
colleagues split 19 men with an average of four  
and a half years of training experience into a 
constant or varied group. Both groups train 3
times per week, on non-consecutive days, for 8 
weeks. Each session, they trained the bench press,  
overhead press, lat pull down, cable row, back squat, leg press and leg extension for 3 sets each  
and 2 minutes of rest between sets. The constant 
group for each exercise used a load that allowed  
them to perform 8 to 12 reps to failure 
each set. The varied group, on day 1 of each week,  
used a load allowing them to perform 2 to 4
reps to failure each exercise set. On day 2 of  
each week, a load allowing them to perform 8
to 12 reps to failure each exercise set, and  
on day 3 of each week, a load allowing them to 
perform 20 to 30 reps to failure each exercise set.  
Increases in elbow flexor, triceps brachii, and 
vastus lateralis thickness, measured by ultrasound,  
were statistically similar between both 
groups. That said, increases in elbow flexor  
and triceps brachii thickness do appear to favor 
the varied group. I managed to find an article by  
James Krieger, one of the authors of this study, 
exploring this more. Looking at the individual  
data for the triceps, there is one clear outlier in 
the varied group. After removing this outlier, the  
results still favor the varied group. Looking 
at the individual data for the biceps, after  
removing one outlier from the constant group,  
the results are pretty similar. Looking at the  
individual data for the vastus lateralis, the 
results are similar. So, except for the triceps,  
the varied and constant group experienced similar 
gains. It seems likely that the tricep results  
were a result of random variation, as it was not 
statistically significant. Remember, there were only  
19 trained subjects in this study, differences in 
genetics and degree of training experience could  
explain these findings. As a result, this paper 
overall suggests using different rep ranges does  
not improve muscle growth. Moving on, De souza and 
colleagues spit 26 untrained men into a constant,  
linear, or daily undulating group. All groups trained 
the smith machine squat and leg extension, 2
per week for 6 weeks. The constant group trained 
to each exercise with 8 reps to failure, the  
linear group trained each exercise with 12 reps 
to failure for the first 4 week,  and then 8
reps to failure for the last two weeks. The daily 
undulating group, for the first 4 weeks, used 12  
reps to failure for each exercise on Monday, and 8 
reps to failure on Thursday. For the last 2 weeks,  
they used 10 reps to failure for each exercise on 
Monday and 6 reps to failure on Thursday. Increases  
in quadriceps cross-sectional area, measured by 
MRI, was similar between all three groups, further  
indicating using different rep ranges is not more 
effective than using a constant rep range. Fink  
and colleagues assigned each arm of 21 untrained 
men into a high load, light load, or mix condition.  
All subjects trained the unilateral dumbbell biceps 
curl, 3 times per week, on non-consecutive days,  
for 8 weeks. The high load condition involved 
3 sets to failure with an 80% one  
rep max load every session and 2 minutes of rest 
between sets. Resulting in around 7 to 3
reps per set. The light load condition involved 
3 sets to failure with a 30%  
one rep max load every session and 2 minutes 
of rest between sets, resulting in around 40 to  
10 reps per set. The mixed condition, throughout 
the 8 weeks, alternated between 2 weeks  
of training with a high load condition, and then 
2 weeks of training with a light load condition.  
Increases in elbow flexor cross-sectional area, measured by MRI, were similar between all three  
conditions. Again, suggesting using different rep 
ranges/loads does not improve muscle growth.  
There are a few other studies comparing the use of 
different rep ranges to using a constant rep range.  
However, the issue with these studies is they used 
body composition or circumference measurements.  
These measurements are less sensitive and accurate 
compared to using MRI or ultrasound. Remember,  
the three studies we just looked at used MRI 
or ultrasound. Having said that, the majority  
of these studies still found no difference in 
body composition or circumference measurements  
between using different rep ranges or using 
a constant rep range. Adding further support  
to the idea using different rep ranges does not 
improve muscle growth. But, two studies did observe  
improved body composition or circumference size 
when using different rep ranges. Interestingly,  
1 of the studies by Kraemer and colleagues 
lasted 9 months. They split 27 untrained women  
into either a constant or varied group. Both groups 
trained 3 times per week for 9 months.  
The constant group performed 8 to 
10 reps to failure for all exercises.  
The varied group performed 4 to 6 reps to 
failure for each exercise on day 1 of each week,  
8 to 10 reps to failure on day 2 of each week, and 
12 to 15 reps to failure on day 3 of each week.  
Increases in fat free mass, measured by skin fold 
calipers, were significantly greater for the varied  
group. Again, this measurement is not as sensitive 
or reliable compared to MRI or ultrasound  
measurements. So we should approach this with 
some caution. But, if the varied group did truly  
experience greater muscle growth, I think there are 
two potential takeaways. The subjects were women,  
all of the other studies assessed in this video 
were conducted on men. Perhaps using different rep  
ranges improves muscle growth for women, but not 
men. mMore research would be needed to figure this  
out. Secondly, this study lasted 9 months. All of 
the other studies assessed in this video lasted 12  
weeks or less. In the short term, there could be no 
difference between using different rep ranges or  
a constant rep range. But in the longer term, maybe 
using different rep ranges ultimately causes more  
muscle growth. This is an interesting idea. Maybe 
using a constant rep range every session in the  
long term has some sort of desensitizing effect, 
meaning the use of different rep ranges could  
be superior for avoiding this problem. However, this 
is just a hypothesis. Given we don't have any other  
research lasting many months, it's difficult to 
say. Hopefully future research adds to this area.  
To conclude, the current evidence leans towards 
the idea that both higher and lower reps produce  
similar slow and fast twitch muscle fiber 
hypertrophy, indicating using different rep  
ranges would not be advantageous in this aspect. 
Moreover, the overall current research suggests  
that in the short term, using different rep ranges 
does not improve muscle growth compared to using a  
constant rep range. It remains possible that in 
the long term, using different rep ranges could  
improve muscle growth. Practically, no research has 
found using different rep ranges to be inferior  
to using a constant rep range, so using 
different rep ranges is perfectly fine.  
For some, this could make training less monotonous 
and more enjoyable. And as discussed, maybe using  
different rep ranges in the longer term 
is superior. But, future research is needed.  
If any more research comes out, 
I do plan to make updated videos :)