Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this Q&A video I want to answer a question
that has been around for a very long time
and that I still get asked on a regular basis,
which is, does caffeine block creatine absorption,
and is it okay for you to consume creatine
and caffeine mixed together.
So although this is a fairly common guideline
that you’ll hear being tossed around quite
a bit, most people don’t realize that this
particular piece of advice really comes from
nothing more than one single study that was
performed back in 1996 which I’ll link in
the description box below, that study used
two groups, one consuming creatine and caffeine
mixed together, and one consuming creatine
on its own, and the study showed that there
was an improvement in overall training performance
in the group who was consuming creatine only,
and there was no improvement in the group
consuming the creatine and the caffeine mixed
together.
Now there’s two important things to take
into account here.
First of all, this particular study only looked
at the overall training performance of the
groups but it didn't examine actual creatine
uptake into the muscles.
Always remember that correlation doesn't equal
causation, and just because one group removed
the caffeine and happened to perform better,
that doesn’t automatically mean that it
was because the caffeine was “blocking”
the absorption of the creatine in the other
group.
Removing caffeine from anyone’s diet is
obiviously going to have noticeable physical
effects, and it’s possible that a short-term
reduction improved their performance in some
other way, like improved sleep quality or
reduced stress and anxiety, these are just
two possible answers out of many.
And secondly, this one study is exactly that,
it’s one study.
No research is perfect, and to truly find
out whether creatine and caffeine do interact
with eachother in a negative way, this effect
would need to be repeated across multiple
studies over time.
And in fact, several follow up studies were
performed on this that tried to duplicate
this effect and they showed no difference
between consuming a creatine and caffeine
combination versus consuming creatine on its
own.
So, based on the fact that the entire “caffeine
blocks creatine” idea comes from nothing
more than one single study, that that study
did not examine actual creatine absorption
or utilization by the body, and that multiple
follow-up studies couldn’t replicate the
effect, I really can’t see any good reason
to take this particular guideline seriously
at this point.
Some people do point out that caffeine is
a diuretic, and that since creatine requires
additional water in order to be stored in
the muscles, that these two things might conflict.
A couple things on that, first off, it’s
never actually been confirmed that caffeine
is in fact a diuretic that causes your body
to lose water, and in 2003 there was an analysis
done of all the main studies back to the 1960’s
that examined caffeine and fluid balance,
and it basically concluded that caffeine does
not actuallycause fluid loss in excess of
the volume of liquid that you consume, and
I’ll link that in the description box below
if you want to check it out.
So, in other words, even if caffeine does
have a diuretic effect in the body, the amount
of liquid in your coffee, or your tea or your
pre-workout drink still contains enough water
to offset it and to still produce a net gain
in your body’s overall levels of water.
So, bottom line, based on the available evidence
(or the lack of evidence) I really wouldn’t
lose any sleep over the creatine and caffeine
issue.
If you typically consume your creatine in
the morning along with your coffee, or if
you use a pre-workout formula that includes
both caffeine and creatine mixed together,
then just go ahead with it and I really wouldn't
worry about it at all.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to learn a ton of other no B.S,
science-based training, nutrition and supplementation
tips to maximize your muscle building and
your fat burning progress along with concrete
step by step plans that you can follow along
with, make sure to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System and you can do that by
clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.