What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and last week
I put out a video talking about conventional
deadlifts and I gave my reasons for why I
consider them to be an optional exercise assuming
that you’re training for hypertrophy, and
I’ll link that in the description box below
if you missed that one.
And the feedback overall was pretty positive
but I have always noticed that anytime you
talk about a particular popular exercise,
whether it’s a squats, or deadlifts, or
bench presses, or barbell rows, or whatever
else and you explain that not everyone has
to be doing every single one of those lifts
in order to get great results there’s always
a certain group of people who will get really
defensive about it, and it’s almost like
they’ll automatically disagree without really
giving any solid reasoning behind it.
I’ve really noticed over the years of making
videos and watching other channels as well
that a lot of people tend to have, sort of
this strong emotional investment in the specific
exercises that they do in the gym to where
everybody has to agree with what they’re
doing and it’s like there’s no alternative.
It’s like if you want a big back you must
do deadlifts.
If you want big legs you must do barbell squats.
If you want big lats you must do overhand
weighted pull ups.
And it’s not that these aren’t good exercise,
they obviously are but regardless of who effective
one specific lift is, the reality is that
there’s no such thing as any single mandatory
muscle building exercise that you absolutely
must include in your plan in order to build
a great physique.
You’ll see articles and videos with titles
like, “Six bodybuilding exercises you must
do”, or you’ll read comments on videos
where someone will say, if you don’t do
deadlifts then you’re a pussy, or there’s
no excuse to not do squats if you want big
legs.
But the truth is that there are many, many
different ways to effectively stimulate each
muscle group on your body for hypertrophy.
And I do think that certain exercise can be
more effective than others and accomplishing
that, but at the end of the day as long as
a given lift allows you to activate the muscle
you’re trying to train and safely places
that muscle under tension and you can consistently
apply progressive overload to that lift, that
muscle is going to become continually bigger
and stronger overtime as a result.
For example, I do think that a basic barbell
squat is probably the most productive overall
lower body exercise that you can do, and that
if you want to maximize your gains and you
can safely do them, then you should.
But it’s not as if specifically putting
a barbell on your back and squatting with
it is the only way to build impressive quads.
There are a lot of different compound quad
exercises that can still work very well.
Things like Bulgarian split squats, which
are a really good lower body movement, different
lunging variations, one legged squats, front
squats, there’s hack squats and other types
of machines squats, leg presses, these don’t
seem as hardcore as regular barbell back squats
but the truth is that all of those will work
very well for building quads size and strength
if you do them consistently.
And this is just one example out of many.
There are certain movement patterns that you
ideally want to cover in order to have a properly
balanced program that hits all of your muscles
in a well rounded way but within those specific
movement patterns themselves there are a lot
of different exercises you can select from
that will build muscle effectively.
So yeah, there are certain exercises for certain
muscles that I would favor over others by
default or that I would consider to be optimal
in a certain situation, but the gap between
a one hundred percent optimal muscle building
exercise and a less than optimal but still
effective alternative is not going to be that
large assuming the alternative lift activates
the muscle you’re trying to target and you’re
achieving progressive overload on it overtime.
There’s no such things as any single muscle
building exercise that you must do and this
is especially true if it isn’t necessarily
your goal to fully maximize hypertrophy and
you’re just going for leaner more athletic
look as opposed to a bodybuilder look.
Or another situation is if you’ve already
achieved your goal physique and you’re trying
to maintain.
That’s another case where you can more freely
mix things up in terms of exercise selection
and still hold on to the muscle that you already
have.
Now, don’t get me wrong here, I’m not
trying to promote laziness, I’m not encouraging
you to go out of your way to avoid certain
exercises just because they’re more difficult
or to just to structure your plan based purely
on all the exercise that you like the most
and avoid the ones that you don’t.
I’m saying to go do leg extension instead
of squats, or to do all cables and all machine
lifts just for convenience, that’s not the
point here.
But I’m more so just want to encourage people
to maintain an open mind when it comes to
exercise selection and not fall into this
dogmatic way of thinking that we tend to see
in the fitness industry where certain exercises
are treated as having magical benefits and
that everyone must do them.
Everyone has different training goals, different
physical limitations, possible equipment limitations,
different preferences, so it’s a matter
of accessing your individual situation and
figuring out which specific exercises suit
your needs.
If you have an injury of some kind then don’t
try to power through a certain exercise that
gives you discomfort just because somebody
else says that it’s an exercise you can’t
go without.
There are a lot of alternatives for each movement
pattern to chose from and you can probably
find one that doesn’t give you discomfort
but that is still effective for building muscle.
Or another example, if your main goal is hypertrophy
then you don’t necessarily need to follow
the same lifts as someone who’s more focused
on powerlifting.
Or just because one YouTuber you follow focuses
on certain exercises and has good physique
doesn’t necessarily mean that you need to
do the same.
Correlation does not always imply causation
and just because they have a good chest and
they perform a certain chest exercise, doesn’t
automatically mean that they have a good chest
because of that lift.
Or that they couldn’t have built it doing
something different.
Again, there are many different methods of
effectively stimulating a given muscle and
at the end of the day it all comes down to
you and your specific situation and no single
muscle building exercise is an absolute must.
So thanks for watching, guys.
If you do want to get access to my recommended
step-by-step workouts with what I consider
to be the optimal muscle building movements
but with good alternatives for ach as well
depending on your situation, along with nutrition
guides, supplement guides and one-on-one coaching
then you can check out my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by visiting
www.BodyTransformationTruth.com, the link
is in the description.
Make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe if you enjoyed it.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com
and you can follow me on social media here
as well if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll see you in the next video.