Up until recently, the scientific consensus
was trending towards the idea that a full
range of motion is better than a partial range
of motion for muscle growth.
A full range of motion indicates you move
the joints involved in an exercise through
their full potential in that movement.
A partial range of motion indicates you move
the joints in an exercise through a select
portion of their full potential.
Excluding the new study we'll assess in this
video, there have been 6 studies comparing
a full to partial range of motion for hypertrophy.
4 of these found a full range of motion to
be better, 1 found no effect of range of motion,
and the last one found a partial range of
motion to be better.
In the comment section, after watching this
video, you may wish to read a pinned comment
detailing some info and notes about the one
study that found a partial range of motion
to be better.
So, in total, although it's not particularly
overwhelming, the overall evidence does suggest
using a full range of motion is superior.
However, if you were to carefully assess these
4 studies, you could not truly conclude that
a full range of motion is optimal.
Let me explain.
All of these studies used a partial range
of motion that trained the muscle at a short
or neutral length.
Let's demonstrate this by quickly going through
each of the four studies.
Pinto et al. used a preacher curl, one group
of subjects used a full range of motion, from
0 degrees of elbow flexion to 130 degrees
of elbow flexion.
Another group used a partial range of motion,
from 50 to 100 degrees of elbow flexion.
Due to this range of motion, the biceps would
have been working at a short to neutral length.
Increases in biceps thickness favored the
full range of motion group.
HOWEVERRRR, what if the partial range of motion
group instead used a partial range of motion
that trained the biceps at a long length.
For instance, what if they trained from 0
to 50 degrees of elbow flexion.
Would this still be inferior to a full range
of motion?
The second study by Bloomquist et al. had
a full range of motion group perform squats
from 0 to 120 degrees of knee flexion.
A partial range of motion group performed
the exercise from 0 to 60 degrees of knee
flexion, meaning the quadriceps would have
been working at a short length.
Increases in thigh cross-sectional area across
many regions of the muscle were significantly
greater for the full range of motion group.
But again, what if the partial range of motion
group used a range of motion that trained
the quadriceps at long lengths.
For instance, what if they trained from 60
to 120 degrees of knee flexion?
The third study by Kubo et al. had a full
range of motion group perform squats from
0 to 140 degrees of knee flexion.
A partial range of motion group performed
the exercise from 0 to 90 degrees of knee
flexion, meaning the quadriceps, adductors,
and glutes would have been working at a short
to neutral length.
Increases in quadriceps volume were similar
between both groups, but increases in gluteus
maximus and adductor volume were significantly
greater for the full range of motion group.
Again, what if the partial range of motion
group used the bottom range of motion in the
squat, to train the muscles at a long length.
Would the results still be the same?
The fourth and final study by McMahon et al.
had a full range of motion group perform a
range of lower body exercises from 0 to 90
degrees of knee flexion.
A partial range of motion group carried out
the exercises from 0 to 50 degrees of knee
flexion, resulting in the quadriceps being
trained at short lengths.
Vastus lateralis cross-sectional area increases
at most regions favor the full range of motion
group.
Again, what if the partial range of motion
group used a range of motion that trained
the quadriceps at a long length.
For instance, what if they trained from 50
to 90 degrees of knee flexion?
So, on the face of it, these 4 studies collectively
indicate a full range of motion is better
than a partial one.
But, upon closer analysis, they only truly
indicate a partial range of motion that trains
the muscle at a short to neutral length is
inferior to a full range of motion.
They do not inform us of how a partial range
of motion that trains a muscle at a long length
compares to a full range of motion.
Fortunately, a new study by Pedrosa et al.
does.
45 untrained women were assigned to one of
five groups: a long length, short length,
full range of motion, varied, or control group.
We won't mention the control group any further.
They did no training and, as expected, experienced
minimal gains.
All four training groups trained a knee extension
machine with a 2-second lifting and 2-second
lowering phase, three times per week for 12
weeks.
The long length group trained with a partial
range of motion that worked the quadriceps
at a long length.
From 100 to 65 degrees of knee flexion.
The short length group trained with a partial
range of motion that worked the quadriceps
at a short length.
From 65 to 30 degrees of knee flexion.
The full range of motion group trained with
a near full range of motion.
From 100 to 30 degrees of knee flexion.
The varied group, in one session, performed
the knee extension identical to the long length
group, but in their next session, they performed
it identical to the short length group.
They continued alternating between these two
ranges of motions throughout the study.
All groups trained the exercise each session
with 3-6 sets of 7 repetitions with a 60%
one-rep max load, using 3 minutes of rest
between sets.
The 60% one-rep max load was specific to each
group's range of motion.
Every 2 weeks, one-rep max for each group's
respective range of motion was retested to
readjust the 60% one-rep max training load.
Cross-sectional area of the rectus femoris
and vastus lateralis was measured at 40, 50,
60, and 70% of the thigh bone length.
Looking at the results, the long length group
experienced the best muscle growth responses
compared to all other groups.
But, the varied group was a close second.
These results are truly surprising and challenge
conventional beliefs.
Let us further break down the findings more.
At 40% of the thigh bone length, increases
in rectus femoris and vastus lateralis cross-sectional
area were statistically similar between all
groups.
But, at 50% of the thigh bone length, increases
for the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis
were similar between the long length and varied
group BUT greater than the other two groups.
At 60% of the thigh bone length, increases
for the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis
were similar between the long length and varied
group BUT greater than the two other groups.
Finally, at 70% of the thigh bone length,
increases for the rectus femoris and vastus
lateralis were greatest for the long length
group compared to ALL other groups.
These results clearly demonstrate that there
is a difference between a partial range of
motion that trains a muscle at a short length
and a partial range of motion that trains
a muscle at a long length.
Furthermore, a partial range of motion that
trains the muscle at a long length does not
appear to be inferior to a full range of motion.
In fact, at most measured regions, it was
superior.
Before we speculate on the reason for these
results, there is other research supporting
the idea that training a muscle at a long
length is superior to training a muscle at
a short length.
A study by McMahon et al. had a long length
group train the knee extension from 90 to
40 degrees of knee flexion, meaning the quadriceps
were trained at a long length.
A short-length group trained the exercise
from 50 to 0 degrees of knee flexion, meaning
the quadriceps were trained at a short length.
Cross-sectional area increases for the vastus
lateralis at all measured regions were greater
for the long length group.
Unfortunately, this study did not have a full
range of motion group.
Nevertheless, it clearly demonstrates how
a partial range of motion at a long muscle
length is superior to one at a short length.
Research on isometric training further supports
this.
Isometric training is where you hold a muscle
in a static contraction.
A review paper by Oranchuk et al. combined
the results of 9 different studies and found
that isometric training at a long muscle length
produced greater muscle growth compared to
isometric training at a short length.
So, to return to the core of this video, a
partial range of motion that trains a muscle
at a long length might be overall superior
to a full range of motion.
Why?
There is no certain answer to this question
yet.
But, there are a few potential hypotheses.
Firstly, training a muscle at a long length
with a partial range of motion could result
in greater metabolic stress and muscle damage.
For instance, one study found that an isometric
knee extension at a long muscle length resulted
in greater oxygen consumption compared to
contractions at a short length.
Perhaps implying more metabolic stress.
Additionally, a few studies found training
a muscle at a longer length resulted in greater
muscle damage in the days after training compared
to training at a shorter length.
The caveat with these studies is they compared
long length partial range of motion or isometric
training to short length training, not to
full range of motion training.
When compared to a full range of motion, there
could still be a difference, but without research,
it is difficult to say.
Nevertheless, I believe these reasons are
unsatisfactory.
Mainly because the role of metabolic stress
and muscle damage in muscle growth is far
from clear.
There are numerous lines of evidence that
would suggest more metabolic stress or more
muscle damage does not result in more muscle
growth.
A much better-categorized mechanism of muscle
growth is mechanical tension.
And as it turns out, there might actually
be ways in which a partial range of motion
at long muscle lengths induces greater mechanical
tension.
First, we need to establish what mechanical
tension truly is.
Mechanical tension is simply equal to the
force generated by a muscle.
A muscle generates force via active tension
or passive tension.
Exploring active tension first, this is the
force generated by the contractile units of
a muscle.
Looking at the layers of a muscle, within
a muscle fiber are myofibrils.
Myofibrils are home to the contractile units
of a muscle, called sarcomeres.
These generate force when something called
the myosin head extends from the myosin filament,
and pulls on something called the actin filament
towards the M-line, shortening the length
of the sarcomere.
The force generated by this interaction ultimately
pulls on tendons and results in muscle contraction.
Put simply, there are mechanosensors that
detect these very forces, and go on to initiate
signaling cascades that result in muscle hypertrophy.
Zooming out, high levels of active tension
is a result of two components: muscle fiber
recruitment and the amount of force generated
by each muscle fiber.
High levels of muscle fiber recruitment mean
more sarcomeres in a muscle are generating
force, while a high amount of force generated
by each muscle fiber means the sarcomeres
are producing high amounts of force.
There is some research demonstrating individuals
possess greater voluntary activation when
contracting a muscle at a long length.
This implies that the body may be able to
recruit more muscle fibers and/or produce
more force with each muscle fiber when you
contract muscles at a long length.
Let me explain further.
Voluntary activation refers to how much of
a muscle you can access to produce force.
Generally, no one can actually activate a
muscle 100% fully.
Using special equipment, researchers can figure
out what percentage of a muscle's force-producing
potential you can voluntarily activate during
maximal efforts.
Quite a few studies have demonstrated that
individuals experience greater voluntary activation
during contractions at longer muscle lengths.
As one example, Douget et al. measured voluntary
activation of the quadriceps during different
stages on a knee extension machine.
When subjects performed a maximal contraction
at 50 degrees of knee flexion, their voluntary
activation level was 93.6% on average.
When subjects performed a maximal contraction
at 75 degrees of knee flexion, voluntary activation
was slightly higher, on average 96%.
Finally, when subjects performed a maximal
contraction at 100 degrees of knee flexion,
voluntary activation was even higher, around
98.5% on average.
So, subjects experienced greater voluntary
activation when the quadriceps were at a longer
lengths, indicating an enhanced capacity to
recruit more muscle fibers and/or produce
more force with each muscle fiber.
Therefore, performing a partial range of motion
at long muscle lengths may allow you to experience
higher levels of active tension for the full
duration of the exercise.
When using a full range of motion, your active
tension capacity would fluctuate throughout
the range of motion.
When the muscle is at a long length, it would
be able to reach higher active tension levels,
but as it moves to a more shortened length,
its active tension capacity may slightly diminish.
This fluctuation and inconsistency may explain
why a full range of motion could be inferior
to a partial range of motion at long muscle
lengths.
Aside from active tension, passive tension
also plays a role in mechanical tension.
Returning to the structure of a muscle, we
detailed how within muscle fibers are myofibrils
and how within myofibrils are sarcomeres.
Passive tension is the force generated when
a sarcomere is stretched.
More specifically, when a molecule within
the sarcomere called titin is stretched, it
generates passive tension.
This tension is essentially the resistance
to stretch.
Like an elastic rubber band, when you stretch
it, it resistances stretch.
Furthermore, once you let go, that tension
that resisted stretch can snap the rubber
band back to its resting shape.
Titin acts in much the same way.
The passive tension generated by titin is
detected by mechanosensors which go on to
initiate signaling cascades that result in
muscle hypertrophy.
Now, one would assume that when a muscle is
stretched, so at a long length, its sarcomeres
are also stretched, meaning passive tension
is high.
However, somewhat confusingly, this isn't
always the case.
A muscle can have its sarcomeres arranged
in a way that means when it is stretched,
its sarcomeres aren't stretched to the point
of high amounts of passive tension.
Moreover, at a given muscle length, within
the same muscle, different sarcomeres may
be at different lengths.
Having said this, they're still likely are
muscles, or at least parts of a muscle, that
have its sarcomeres sufficiently stretched
to the point of amounts of high passive tension
when the muscle is at a long length.
Although there isn't a substantial amount
of research in this area, the muscles of the
quadriceps do appear to have their sarcomeres
sufficiently stretched to the points of amounts
high passive tension when the quadriceps are
at a long length, at least in the muscle regions
measured in the study.
Therefore, using a partial range of motion
that works a muscle at long lengths might
result in a consistently high contribution
of passive tension to the exercise.
Conversely, when using a full range of motion,
the degree of passive tension may fluctuate
throughout the exercise.
It may be high when the muscle is at a long
length, but then sharply disappear when the
muscle is shortened.
The more consistent passive tension with a
partial range of motion at long muscle lengths
might further explain why it could be superior
to a full range of motion.
So, to summarize this section of the video,
it's plausible that a partial range of motion
at long muscle lengths results in greater
active and passive tension, making it a more
powerful stimulus for hypertrophy compared
to a full range of motion.
I should emphasize that these are hypotheses,
although I believe they are quite strong hypotheses,
future research would need to verify them.
Now, I think it would be useful to close off
the video with a discussion on some limitations
and further considerations.
The exercise used in the main study of this
video by Pedrosa et al. was a knee extension
machine.
When using a full range of motion on this
exercise, the exercise is hardest and requires
the most amount of force production closer
to full knee extension, when the quadriceps
are at a short length.
Therefore, during fatiguing repetitions, the
quadriceps are being challenged the most at
a short length, not a long length.
In other words, when performing full range
of motion repetitions on the knee extension,
you are not training the quadriceps maximally
at a longer length.
Could this very fact explain why the long
length group achieved superior muscle growth?
What if the study used an exercise that, with
a full range of motion, required maximal force
production at long muscle lengths?
For example, in a full range of motion squat,
the exercise is most challenging when the
quads, glutes, and adductors are more lengthened
than shortened.
Considering this, would a partial range of
motion squat at long lengths (so performing
the bottom half of the squat) still produce
more muscle growth than a full range of motion
squat?
This is a question for future research.
Regarding the Pedrosa et al. study, although
it measured cross-sectional area at quite
a few regions of the quadriceps, it did not
measure everything.
Measurements were taken at 40-70% of the thigh
bone length for the rectus femoris and vastus
lateralis, but what about 10-30% or 70-100%.
Moreover, what about the vastus medialis and
vastus intermiedus.
It remains possible, although unlikely, that
in these unmeasured regions, the full range
of motion, or even the short length group,
could have experienced superior gains.
Finally, it's very important to remember that
this is only one study.
Replication is important in science.
At the moment, it would not be sensible to
truly confirm and conclude that a partial
range of motion at long lengths is superior
to a full range of motion, future research
is required.
Based on your interpretation of this video,
you may wish to experiment with partial ranges
of motions at long muscle lengths.
Ultimately, there probably is no massive or
terrible downside.
The future of range of motion research looks
exciting, and I look forward to creating new
videos in the future if any new research comes
along.