What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
And in this video here we're talking about
lame weak excuses for not working out.
So this is for the people out there who want
to get into better shape, they want to build
muscle, lose fat, improve their overall health
and fitness but they just can't seem to really
get started or stick to a solid training program
over any length of time.
And I've been doing fitness coaching for a
lot of years now.
I've talked to an endless number of different
people out there in person as well as just
people who ask me online for fitness advice,
and so I've pretty much heard every possible
excuse in the book for why a person apparently
can't get to the gym and why they can't follow
a decently healthy diet.
And with the exception of a small percentage
of cases that are very rare, most of those
excuses are just not valid when it all comes
down to it.
And in today's video I'm going to offer you
some perspective by outlining five of the
most common excuses I hear and the real truth
behind those excuses.
If you enjoyed this video guys, make sure
to hit the subscribe button below to stay
in the loop on all of my future content.
And click the little bell symbol as well,
that way you'll be notified whenever a new
video is available.
So that you don't miss out on anything.
So, excuse number one probably the most common
one of all which is: I don't have time to
work out.
Now, I understand that some people do lead
very busy lives and have a lot going on but
the reality is that it really doesn't require
a lot of actual gym time in the first place
in order to build a great physique.
People seem to have this idea that anybody
who's an impressive shape must be in the gym
for hours and hours doing weights and cardio,
five days a week or more.
But that's really not the case and it really
doesn't need to be the case either.
Now, for most average lifters three weight
training workouts per week is really all you're
going to need.
Intermediate and advanced trains can use higher
frequencies if they want depending on their
goals.
But three per week is what I would, for sure,
recommend at least for beginners as a starting
point.
And those workouts, with the warm ups included,
as long as you go through it efficiently they
probably are going to take you any more than
about an hour to an hour and fifteen minutes
the most.
And some people can probably get it done even
quicker than that.
So if you really audit your week honestly,
you take a look at everything piece by piece,
I'm pretty sure you can make time for that
if you really want to.
How much time do you spend watching TV, how
much time do you spend on YouTube or on social
media, how much you spend with aimless web
surfing, or playing video games, or whatever
else?
You almost certainly have time if you're being
really honest with yourself.
And in the rare case that three workouts per
week truly isn't an option for you, your schedule
is just totally packed all throughout the
week then the truth is that you can actually
still get great results even on just two weight
training workouts per week.
I did a video on this a while back that I'll
link in the description box, but as long as
things are properly structured and properly
executed, you absolutely can make consistent
progress on just two sessions a week.
It's usually not going to be a hundred percent
optimal in comparison to doing three workouts
or more but it'll still be very effective
regardless.
I mean, if you want to be even more efficient
time wise you can also use a high-intensity
low-volume approach to your workouts.
Which means that you're going to reduce the
total number of sets that you do per workout
and per muscle group but you're going to increase
the intensity by training all the way to failure
on each set.
If you train to failure then you really don't
need much total volume to see solid progress.
You could probably do as few as eight to ten
total sets per workout.
And it might only take you about forty to
forty-five minutes for each session.
Now, I understand that there's also travel
time to and from the gym and for some people
the nearest gym might be far away so that
can make it harder.
In that case the other option is to just train
from home.
You really don't need much to get a solid
workout in.
A bench and a set of adjustable dumbbells
on its own is going to be enough right there
to train your entire body effectively as long
as you have access to enough weight.
A pull-up bar is another good addition but
that's really all you need in order to keep
things as simple as possible.
So unless you are an extreme exception and
your schedule is completely filled from the
moment you wake up to the moment you go to
bed, seven days a week, saying that you have
no time to work out is almost certainly not
true.
Because it is possible to make solid progress
with as little as two workouts per week for
less than an hour if you really know what
you're doing.
And virtually anybody should be able to make
time for that if they really want to.
Excuse number two is: I'm too tired to work
out.
Now, I'm not going to go into too much detail
on this one because the same reasons that
I just gave on the previous excuse apply to
this one as well.
I can buy that your lifestyle is busy enough
that maybe you're too tired to be in the gym,
say five days a week, but again you don't
need to be in the gym five days a week.
Two to three workouts per week is all you're
going to need.
I get that you're tired, I'm tired, we're
all tired, but you're not so tired that you
physically can't do two to three workouts
per week.
If you feel really drained by the end of the
day like a lot of people do and that makes
it tougher to get to the gym then you can
move your workouts to the morning or you can
do them at lunch if possible.
Move one of them onto the weekend when you
have more free time.
There's always a way to make it happen if
you truly want to.
And just because you feel physically tired
doesn't mean that you can't use your willpower
to make it happen anyway.
Usually just getting off the couch is the
hardest part but once you start moving and
you get into your workout you'll realize that
you aren't actually as tired as you thought.
And you'll feel way better once it's all done
anyway.
Excuse number three is: I have a bad back,
or a bad shoulder, or just insert whatever
joint you want into that sentence.
Now, I totally agree injuries are a pain.
I'm not saying you don't have a legit injury
that is making it harder to train.
But unless it's a really severe situation,
there's almost always a way to still train
around it and to still get in an effective
workout regardless.
I've had plenty of injuries over the years
because I've been training for a really long
time.
I made a lot of mistakes in my earlier years.
And I still have multiple injuries that I'm
working around right now.
And it really just comes down to making the
proper exercise selections, eliminating things
that cause you pain or discomfort, moderating
your training intensity, doing proper warm-ups,
and also just making active steps to actually
fix the injury at its root cause.
Now, I don't want people to misconstrue this
advice because if you do have a legit injury
then obviously you need to be careful.
But if you really take a look at your training
and you plan it out and you test and you treat
different things, you usually still can train
your entire body effectively even if you do
have a particular joint that's acting up.
No single exercise in the gym is absolutely
mandatory.
And there are plenty of options for each muscle
group available.
You can try different variations of the same
exercise, you can replace certain exercises
with something completely different, you can
try using cables or machines that give you
a better angle, and you can also lighten up
the weight and train using a more slower,
more controlled rep.
You can also use higher rep ranges, you can
even look into something like blood flow restriction
training for certain muscle groups.
If you really want to make it happen then
usually there is a way.
It might not be a one hundred percent optimal
training plan if you really can't push yourself
or can train certain muscles with higher intensity,
but optimal and effective are two very different
things.
And you can still get in a highly effective
workout regardless if you take the time to
plan things out properly.
Excuse number four is: I have bad genetics.
Now, I'm not going to sit here and say that
genetics don't play a role in how quickly
someone can build muscle or what kind of ultimate
physique they can achieve.
But unless you're on the very extreme end
of the bell curve in terms of genetics pretty
much anyone out there can gain muscle, lose
fat, gain strength and build an impressive
overall physique.
Some people can do it faster than others no
doubt, but with the right approach, with consistent
effort and with patience you can do it too.
And to sit there and say, I have bad genetics
so I'm not even going to try, that's a really
weak excuse quite honestly.
And I think a lot of people just use that
as a justification for being lazy even though
they know deep down that they could still
make it happen.
I mean, just because you're not the most talented
musician doesn't mean that you shouldn't even
attempt to learn how to play the guitar, for
example.
Or just because you're naturally shy that
you're just going to sit in your house all
day and never go out and interact with anybody
or try to improve your social skills.
Or just because you're not the most athletic
person you're never going to play sports.
Yeah, you might not be the greatest at those
things but you can still become proficient
if you put in the effort.
Everybody is dealt different cards genetically.
Everybody has different strengths and weaknesses.
And, by the way, if you've never even stuck
to a proper workout plan over any real length
of time then you probably don't even really
know just how good or bad your genetics really
are in the first place.
So unless you legitimately have some sort
of medical condition that truly prevents you
from being able to gain significant muscle
mass or maintain a leaner level of bodyfat,
that is true for some people but it's a very
small minority.
Unless you're in that situation the whole
genetics card is ultimately irrelevant.
You can still get into great shape if you
really want to and that's really all there
is to it.
And then the last excuse is: I’ve tried
everything but nothing works.
If you had actually tried everything then
you wouldn't even be sitting here watching
this video right now because you'd already
be in great shape.
There is no possible way for someone to have
tried everything and not gotten results.
Because the truth is that building muscle
and losing fat is not rocket science.
It's actually pretty straightforward.
And it's mostly just a matter of nailing down
a few key principles and then executing them
consistently from week to week.
So, no, you didn't try everything.
Either your program was not properly structured
and maybe it had a few key errors in it that
we're preventing you from seeing progress,
or you did have a solid program in place but
you just didn't follow it properly, or you
were just expecting results way too quickly
and you didn't follow through for long enough.
It does take time and patience to make a significant
physique transformation.
And just because you didn't gain ten pounds
of muscle in your first month or lose fifteen
pounds of fat doesn't mean your program wasn't
working.
You have to commit to this for the long run
and if your program truly isn't working then
it's up to you to seek out the proper guidance
to find out where you're going wrong and what
to fix.
But as long as you are patient and persistent
you will get the results you're after.
Because, again, this stuff ultimately is not
that complicated.
So if you've been struggling to get in shape
and you've been justifying it to yourself
with any of those five excuses I just gave,
I hope this gave you some insight and sparked
some new motivation in you to give it another
go.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan to eliminate all the guesswork in terms
of training, nutrition, and supplementation
so that you can achieve your goal physique
as efficiently as possible and know you're
on the right path towards it without the need
for any excuses, then you can grab my complete
step-by-step Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BTBluePrint.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video, guys, as always
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment, and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on Facebook and Instagram
as well if you aren't already.
The links for that are also below.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I will see you in the next video.