What's going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
With a bit of a different video topic today
but it's something that I see a lot of guys
talking about on fitness related videos, so
I figured I would just throw in my two cents
here.
And that's on the issue of height.
A lot of guys who are training to build an
aesthetic physique, you know, who want to
improve their appearance, they're probably
into self development type of stuff in general,
they probably want to improve their success
with women, and height is something that comes
into play and that does seem to get discussed
quite a bit.
Guys want to know, usually guys that are around
average height or shorter height, whether
height really matters in terms of attraction,
you know, do women care about height, that
sort of thing.
So in this video today I'm going to give you
my own opinion along with some practical advice
if you are a guy who is maybe on the shorter
side and maybe if it's something that you
are a bit insecure about.
Before I dive into the video, if you do enjoy
this content don't forget to hit the subscribe
button below to stay updated on all of my
future videos.
And make sure to click the little bell symbol
as well because that way you'll be notified
whenever a new video is available.
So the first question is: do women care about
height?
Do they find a taller height to be more attractive
in general?
And the answer is: as a general rule, yes.
We can go to the, sort of, fuzzy, feel good
route here and just say, no it doesn't matter
at all it's all about how confident you are,
etcetera, etcetera.
That works really well if you make a living
selling pickup advice but it's not really
based in reality.
And it's no different from the fact that in
general men prefer women with healthy hair
and healthy skin and healthy body fat levels,
facial symmetry, boobs, that kind of stuff.
It's the exact same thing.
So, yes, height is a factor in physical attraction.
It's evolutionarily hardwired probably because
it's perceived as a sign of dominance in some
way, so we just have to be honest about that.
In general, yes height is considered attractive.
Now, that said, there are a few very important
things to consider on this.
First off, height is a factor but keep in
mind that it's just one factor out of many
factors, okay.
Facial features, your physique, your personality,
social status, lifestyle, your values, your
interests, those things all come into play
as well.
So as a man it's not like your height completely
defines you.
It's just one thing of many things about you.
Yes, if a woman sat down and wrote on paper
all the features of what she thinks her absolute
ideal guy would be physically and personality-wise,
probably somewhere in there she's going to
list that he's tall, or at least taller than
she is.
But also keep in mind that a lot of times
what a girl says that she wants logically
doesn't always have to perfectly match up
in the real world.
If you have other attributes that are attractive
to her and there's natural chemistry there
then even though she might ideally prefer
someone with more height on a logical level,
it's not necessarily going to be a limiting
factor.
And she could still be very attractive, regardless.
It's the same way that you could write down
all the features of your ideal girl, but I'm
sure you've had the experience where you had
that idea in your head but then you met someone
in person who didn't perfectly match all your
preferences in certain ways, or was even the
opposite of your preferences in certain ways,
but you were still very attracted to that
person nonetheless.
It's the same idea.
Or maybe you meet someone who does logically
fit all your preferences but you just don't
feel that natural chemistry with them.
That can happen, too.
So that's the first factor here.
Secondly, the importance of height can vary
a lot between different girls.
So some will claim that if you aren't at least
six feet tall then don't even bother thinking
about it, even though a lot of the time that
still doesn't always hold up.
And then there are other girls who are totally
fine with a guy who's around the same height
that they are or even shorter in some cases.
So keep in mind that we're just speaking in
generalities here in overall general terms.
On average, in general, across the population,
women will prefer taller men.
There's no real doubt about that but there's
still a ton of variation within that population,
and some girls really don't care that much
if at all.
So if you're a guy who just has his shit together
in life in general, takes care of himself,
and is actively doing what he can to, sort
of, maximize his value, so to speak, then
there are still going to be tons of girls
out there for you even if you are on the shorter
side.
And also keep in mind that for a lot of women
height is mainly a factor relative to how
tall they are.
A lot of women out there just want a guy who's
at least a bit taller than them.
So you don't necessarily have to be six foot
three like myself, even if you are a bit shorter
there are also going to be plenty of shorter
females out there too who usually aren't going
to care as much.
So that's, sort of, like the theoretical side
of things.
That's just my opinion.
Yes, on average women do care about height
to some degree and it's something that they
will find attractive on average but it's only
one factor out of many factors about you.
Every girl is different and some don't care
nearly as much as others do.
And a lot of the time it's not your absolute
height that matters, or it's not the most
important thing, but instead it's your height
relative to her height.
And fortunately most of us live in cities
where there are thousands, tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of women walking around
so there's going to be plenty of girls out
there who you're going to be compatible with
as long as you're actively putting yourself
out there and not spending your time sitting
around complaining on the internet about how
women don't like you because you're too short.
Now, what about the practical side of things?
So let's say you are a shorter dude and you
want to maximize your attractiveness and minimize
that physical gap from not having that extra
bit of height.
Now, whether you should even go out of your
way to care so much about what women think
about you is one thing, that's a whole other
discussion, but let's just go with the assumption
here that you do care to some degree.
That's pretty normal thing.
It's a pretty normal thing to want to attract
the women that you're attracted to.
So what can you do given that height is genetic
and that you really can't control it?
Well, the first thing is to recognize and
accept exactly that, you can't control it,
right?
Once puberty is over your height is set in
stone based on genetics and there's nothing
you can do to increase it aside from surgery,
basically.
So it's cliché advice but it's completely
true and that is that stressing out over something
that you can't control is completely pointless.
It gets you absolutely nowhere and all it
really does is use up mental energy that you
could otherwise be using to improve yourself
in other areas.
But I think it actually goes deeper than that
on this issue, on the issue of height.
When we look at why women find height attractive
in the first place, it's probably because
from an evolutionary perspective taller height
represents a form of strength and dominance.
There could be other factors that I'm not
aware of, but I think it's safe to say that
that's probably the main one.
Women are hard-wired to want to feel protected
because evolutionarily that meant a better
chance of survival for her offspring, etcetera,
etcetera.
But aside from physical appearance the other
way that a woman is going to detect that,
is through your behavior.
Which is why women find confidence to also
be a highly attractive feature on average.
How confident and how sure you are of yourself
is also a signal of your status and your overall
strength as well.
So if you're a shorter guy and it's a big
source of insecurity for you that's going
to come through in your behavior even if it's
only on a subtle level.
So it's not just that you need to stop worrying
about your height for the sake of your own
just mental well-being, but if you're insecure
about it, if you are out there and you're
talking to a girl and somewhere in the back
of your mind even on an unconscious level
you're thinking about the fact that you're
too short, you're not tall enough for her,
then you're actually making it a lot worse
because it's lowering your perceived status
even further.
Because it's probably going to come off as
you being unsure of yourself.
So that's step one.
You just have to forget about it.
Literally forget about it.
It's not even something that enters your head.
And then step two, of course, is to work on
the things that you can control.
And if height is perceived as being a masculine
trait then you want to work on those things
that will trigger that same perception.
So things that make you appear stronger and
more dominant.
And the simplest and the most immediate one,
of course, is to work on your physique.
You don't necessarily need to get huge and
shredded to have a positive effect here, but
putting on some decent muscle mass is going
to help out quite a bit when it comes to giving
you that stronger and more masculine appearance.
And then for the girls out there who really
do like muscular guys, she might actually
prefer a guy who's a bit shorter but with
a good physique in comparison to a taller
guy with a not-so-good physique.
So that, in my view, is the quickest fix if
you're on the shorter side and you want to
raise your overall attractiveness.
Build a decently muscular but well proportioned
physique, and I have hundreds of free videos
on this on this channel that can help you
out with that, or you can also check out my
Body Transformation Blueprint program up here
or down in the description box that lays everything
out step-by-step if you just want a fully
structured plan that you can follow.
Getting into great shape isn’t necessarily
a cure depending on the situation but it is
the most immediate and the most obvious thing
that you can do.
And then aside from gaining muscle the other
huge factor is your personality and how you
carry yourself.
So, you want to work on improving your social
skills, becoming more confident, more grounded.
That's a loaded topic way beyond the scope
of this video, but keep in mind that if you're
a shorter guy who's confident and charismatic
and interesting, you're probably going to
be better off in the overall picture in comparison
to a guy who may be tall but who lacks those
things.
Again, remember that women say they want height
on paper, yes, but if you put two guys in
the same room, one who's taller one who's
a bit shorter, a lot of the time the tables
can, sort of, turn pretty fast depending on
how those two guys carry themselves.
And keep in mind, and this is really important,
that I'm talking about true self confidence
here not over-the-top, fake confidence, where
it's obvious that you're overcompensating
and trying to look cool and tough.
That's usually going to have the opposite
effect of what you're going for and you're
just going to end up looking try-hard.
So a better term here I think would be self-acceptance,
where you're just generally okay with yourself,
you're okay with the fact that maybe you're
a bit shorter, it's no big deal, it's not
even an issue and that's usually going to
come across as, sort of, more relaxed chill
behavior rather than the loud over-the-top
behavior that you see from guys who are going
out of their way to try and look confident.
And then aside from your physique and your
personality other factors are things like
your overall lifestyle.
So are you someone with some kind of purpose
in your life, someone who's moving ahead and
making things happen, do you have certain
hobbies and interests, like, are you just
generally leading an interesting life.
That's also going to increase your overall
attractiveness and it will come through in
your behavior as well.
And then smaller things like your fashion
sense, your grooming, hygiene, obviously,
that's going to help out too.
So there are a lot of things you can work
on to increase your overall attractiveness
that go way beyond just how tall you are.
I think I'll leave it there.
I hope you found some helpful advice here.
Just like men tend to have certain default
features that they look for in women in terms
of appearance, women also have the same thing.
And height is one of those things.
However, there are a ton of women out there
and there's huge variation in female preferences
from person to person, and height is just
one factor out of many.
It doesn't define you and there are a lot
of other areas you can still work on to maximize
your attractiveness even if you are on the
shorter side.
So, thanks for watching guys.
Make sure to hit that like button below, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on future videos.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
Make sure to follow me on Instagram and Facebook
if you aren't already.
And that's it.
Yeah, thanks for watching.
I'll see in the next video.