What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, RealScienceAthletics.com.
In this video today we're talking about how
to achieve progressive overload if you're
training from home right now and you're limited
on equipment.
It's a little bit windy today, so apologies
if there's a bit of extra noise here.
Before I jump into the video, I just want
to let you guys know that we're currently
running a 20% off discount on all three of
our supplements over at Real Science Athletics
until tomorrow, April 25th at midnight.
So if money is a bit tighter right now and
you want to stock up on our athletes multivitamin,
pre-workout or fish oil, just head over to
realscienceathletics.com.
The link is up here and down below in the
description and use coupon code it TAKEOFF20.
I have no doubt that these are the best formulated
products available in their categories right
now.
If you have any questions about any of them
or you want to compare them to what you're
currently using, just post below or you can
also DM me over on Instagram @SeanNalewanyj.
So if your primary goal right now is mainly
just to maintain your existing gains, then
as long as you have a set of exercises that
allows you to get within a couple of reps
of failure, technically progressive overload
is not going to be necessary, okay?
You can just do a basic maintenance routine
and perform the same weight and reps from
week to week and that should be enough for
your purposes.
However, if you want to continue making muscle
building progress during this period, then
progressive overload is absolutely essential
just as it always is.
It's the underlying driver that forces your
body to put on greater and greater amounts
of muscle over time and without it, you're
just not going to see any significant gains.
All progressive overload really means at the
heart of it is that you need to consistently
increase the workload on your muscles over
time in some capacity.
It doesn't just mean adding more weight to
the bar like a lot of people think.
Now, if you do have access to enough weight
right now and you're still a beginner to intermediate
trainee, then simply lifting more weight over
time should be your primary focus.
But there are a lot of other ways that progressive
overload can be achieved and if you're limited
on training equipment right now or you possibly
have no equipment at all, then you're going
to need to make use of some of these alternate
methods in order to continue making gains.
So let's go over it here.
The first one is very simple and that's to
just perform more reps with the same weight.
Like we've talked about in the last few videos
here, the truth is that you can still build
comparable muscle mass, at least in the short
term, even if you're using very high rep ranges,
definitely up to 30 reps, maybe a bit higher,
though I wouldn't go too high since your cardiovascular
system can become a limiting factor in that
case, especially if it's a bigger compound
exercise.
But for sure up to about 30 reps is probably
a safe amount if we're talking about hypertrophy.
So if right now you can do say, 10 body weight
pull-ups, even without changing anything in
terms of weight or technique or angles, you
can literally just push for more and more
reps, right?
Maybe one week you do 10 reps, next week push
for 11, then 12 and 13 and so on.
It's really that simple.
Or if you can do five handstand pushups right
now or 15 decline pushups, same thing, you
can literally just aim for more reps.
That's a perfectly viable method of progressive
overload and that will stimulate further and
further muscle growth on its own.
The second method is to perform a more challenging
variation of the same exercise.
So this is similar to adding more weight,
but instead of adding a greater load using
an external object, you're just going to change
the position of your body to apply more resistance
to the targeted muscle.
Now, there are tons of different ways this
can be done depending on the muscle group
or the exercise.
For example, it could mean different pushup
progressions like starting with a regular
flat pushup, then making it more difficult
by elevating your feet up behind you or even
on a wall we're doing side to side pushups
or clapping, pushups.
It could mean doing narrow neutral grip chin-ups
and then graduating to overhand pull-ups and
then maybe progressing to a sternum pull up
to make it even more challenging.
For shoulders maybe you start off with a pike
pushup and then you graduate to a handstand
pushup.
For triceps, maybe bench dips is where you
start and then you graduate to regular dips
using two chairs.
Okay?
These are just two examples, or sorry, a few
examples of many different ones.
The third method is to perform your lifts
under greater control.
That alone will go a long way in making a
given level of resistance and a given exercise
variation a lot more challenging.
There are two main ways of doing that.
The first is to perform a slower negative
and the second is to implement a pause in
the contracted position of each rep or the
stretch position or both.
So if right now you tend to perform the negative
pretty quickly, let's say one to two seconds
and you're just largely letting gravity do
the work, you can slow that down to three
or four, even five seconds to make the lift
more difficult.
It doesn't necessarily have to be on every
single rep.
For example, let's say right now on Bulgarian
split squats, you can do 15 reps and you're
using a one to two second negative.
Okay?
You could start by slowing down maybe the
first three reps and then perform the rest
of the reps as normal.
That's technically a form of progression.
The next time, do the first maybe six reps
more slowly and then the rest is normal and
then so on.
Remember here that progressive overload, or
rather with progressive overload, you don't
have to be improving by leaps and bounds every
single time you train, okay?
It's all about small, gradual, incremental
improvements and then letting those improvements
slowly add up over time.
As long as you come back to the gym and you
do more than last time in some capacity, that's
the most important thing.
But getting back to this particular method,
again, you can slow down the negative.
I don't recommend slowing down the concentric.
I think that the concentric should always
be performed with maximum force because the
research is pretty clear that that is optimal
for size and strength gains.
But the other thing you can do is to implement
pauses.
So let's say on an inverted row, right, instead
of just pulling yourself up and then lowering
immediately, you can try holding at the top
for a one to two second count or on a pistol
squat you can lower yourself down and then
hold in the bottom position for a one to two
second count.
Even with just this alone, using a slower
negative and then implementing a hold at one
or both ends of the rep, that can go a long
way right there in helping you get more benefit
out of less resistance and steadily progressing
without having to add extra weight to the
exercise.
Another method you can try, this isn't something
I personally use often, but technically it
is a way to make a given weight more challenging
and it is another method that can be used
for progression, and that's to implement pulse
reps.
A pulse rep is basically where you start by
lifting up the weight halfway, then you lower
back down to the starting position, then perform
a full rep, go back down to the starting position
and then repeat.
So maybe you have limited resistance on say
bicep curls.
Maybe all you have handy is a 10 pound bag
of rice, but you can already crank out 30
reps with that pretty easily.
Slower negatives and static holds can be used
there, but you can also try implementing some
pulse reps to make it even harder.
So those are five methods right there that
you can use to achieve progressive overload
at home without having to add more external
weight into the equation.
The very important thing to keep in mind here
is that all of these methods can be combined,
okay?
You don't have to just train for more reps
or just use more difficult variations or just
alter your technique.
If you start combining all of these methods
together, then in practical terms there's
almost no end to how far you can progress
and certainly no end if we're talking about
training from home this way maybe just for
the next few months.
There are just so many different progression
permutations available.
For example, you could graduate from a regular
pushup to a foot elevated pushup and train
for higher reps and do slower negatives.
Or you could graduate from a split squat to
a pistol squat and implement a two second
pause at the bottom of each rep and do the
first five reps maybe in a pulse fashion.
Then in addition to all of this, let's say
somehow against all odds you manage to exhaust
all of these different methods and you can
do 30 reps per set with the hardest possible
exercise variation with controlled negatives,
paused reps and pulses.
In that case, you can also just perform more
total work by increasing the total number
of sets performed per workout and per week.
Or you can also increase the training frequency
or both.
So instead of 10 weekly sets for quads, you
could bump it up to 12 sets, then 14 sets,
maybe up to about 20 sets or so per week.
Or if you're training a given muscle once
a week right now, you could increase to one
and a half times a week, then twice a week,
then maybe even two and a half times a week
or three times a week at least for a temporary
period.
Another way to perform a more total work in
general is to implement rest pause into your
training.
So instead of increasing the total number
of sets, with rest pause, what you're going
to do is just tag some extra reps onto the
end of each set that you're already doing.
So with rest pause, what you would do is perform
your regular set, do say 12 reps in total,
getting within one to two rep short of failure,
then rest completely for 10 to 15 breaths.
Crank out a few more reps, again, going one
to two rep short of failure, then rest again
and then repeat that once or twice.
That's called multi rep rest pause and it's
a very good way to add more quality reps to
your workout without actually having to perform
an entirely new set each time.
Drop sets are another option here.
I'm not a huge fan of drop sets.
I do prefer rest pause overall, but you could
add in a drop set here and there as well to
make a given exercise more demanding.
As most of you probably know, that's where
you perform your normal set and then immediately
without resting you reduce the weight, crank
out some additional reps and you can repeat
that maybe once or twice.
Then lastly, you can also perform more total
work by just going closer to failure on your
sets in general.
I think about one to two rep, short of failure
on the bulk of your sets is a good sweet spot
to aim for, but some people out there do recommend
as low as three or four reps short of failure.
So if you have been going several reps short
of failure, then you can just bump up the
effort level and take things one to two reps
short.
Or if you're already going one to two reps
short, then you can perform some of your sets
all the way to muscular failure.
I don't recommend performing every single
set to failure, but one option would be to
perform, say the first two sets of an exercise
one to two reps short of failure and then
finish off by taking the last set all the
way to failure.
That's technically a method of progressive
overload as well that you can sprinkle in
if it suits your individual situation.
So there you have it, guys.
That's actually 10 different methods of progressive
overload that you can incorporate into your
home workouts that don't involve adding more
weight to the bar or to your body.
So just to recap, the methods that we covered
are performing more total reps, using more
challenging exercise variations, performing
slower negatives, pausing in the contracted
position of the rep, pausing in the stretch
position of the rep, implementing pulse reps,
performing more total sets, increasing your
training frequency, utilizing rest pause or
drop sets and increasing your level of effort
by training closer to failure.
Like I said, these can all be combined in
various ways and by using different combinations
there's just no way that you're going to run
out of different ways to progress and to stimulate
further and further muscle growth.
Just make sure to write down all your workouts
in the same way as you would if you were training
at a regular gym, the exercises you did, the
amount of weight you lifted if you are adding
external weight, the number of sets you did,
the number of reps and whatever extra techniques
you might've used like negatives or pauses
or rest pause or anything else.
Then just aim for small consistent improvements
each week and let those small improvements
add up over time.
And trust me, they'll add up a lot faster
than you think if you track things diligently
and you will be able to grow from this even
if you're not adding more weight to the bar.
If you found this advice helpful and you do
have access to basic training equipment right
now, some dumbbells, a bench and ideally a
pull up bar, then you can check out my Complete
Body Transformation Blueprint Program by clicking
up here or in the description box below.
That program will help you get the very best
results with multiple training cycles included,
meal plans, video demos, and it can be adapted
to your home gym set up.
Once you sign up, just shoot me an email and
I'll help you with that.
On the other hand, if your training equipment
is very limited, then you can download my
free home upper/lower split that I uploaded
a couple of weeks ago on the link for that
is also in the description, and as always,
make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe if you haven't already
in order to stay up to date on future videos.
Thanks for watching, guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.