Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here, Seannal.com, just woke
up as you can see.
Feeling a little bit groggy right now.
But I wanted to pull out the camera here this
morning and just quickly show you guys what
I've been having for breakfast each morning.
I kind of go in these phases where I'll find
a breakfast meal that I enjoy.
And then I'll just eat that over, and over
and over again.
I think I have the same protein shake pretty
much every morning for about four years straight.
It was two scoops of a Dymatize mocha flavored
whey, one banana, half a cup of oatmeal, a
huge tablespoon of peanut butter, some cinnamon
and mixed in a cup of almond milk.
But I have gone a little bit tired of that.
So, I’ve switched it over to something different.
And I've been having this one for probably
three or four months now.
So, I’m going to have my breakfast here.
Then I'll head over to a coffee shop, and
answer emails, and edit this video and upload
it.
And then head to the gym for light training
session.
So, let's jump in the kitchen real quick.
And I'll just show you guys this pretty simple
breakfast meal.
So, the base of it is going to be just basic
Greek yogurt.
This one is really high in protein.
This is 18 grams of protein for 180 grams.
And I’ll usually use about a 180 gram to
200 grams.
And then after that I throw in about 20 grams
of natural peanut butter, a tablespoon of
strawberry jam, and some cinnamon and then
just mix it all together.
And then, so once it's all mixed up, you get
that base of the yogurt with the strawberry
jam, the peanut butter, the cinnamon and the
Stevia.
And you don't have to add strawberry jam if
you don't want to.
I just really like that combination of peanut
butter and jam mixed together.
But if you want something lower carb or with
fewer calories, then you can just keep the
strawberry jam out.
And then the other main modification that
you can make from there is to either add some
whey protein or not.
Just one scoop mixed in there.
And again, just stir it all around and it
will mix right in.
And you can add the whey or not, depending
on how much protein you want in your diet,
whether you're bulking or cutting, what your
preference is, again, totally up to you.
I was adding a scoop of whey to this every
morning before I came to Australia here.
But I've run out of protein powder for right
now.
And I have to go buy some more.
So, for now, I'm just using the Greek yogurt
without the whey.
So then, after that is some fruit.
I am using bananas and blueberries right now.
This is about 80 grams of banana and about
80 grams of blueberry.
I really like that combination.
But again, this is an issue of personal preference.
And you can add any type of fruit that you
want into this.
Pretty much anything will taste good.
So, just pick the ones that you most prefer.
So, we got the bananas and the blueberries
mixed in there.
And then I always like to finish this off
with some sort of crunchy element, just to
give it some more texture and to add some
more carbs and more overall calories.
So, right now, I'm using these guys here,
Weet-Bix.
I don't think we have these in Canada actually.
But they seem to be pretty popular down here.
So, I'll just take three of those Weet-Bix
bars.
And then I'll basically just crunched it up
and sprinkle it on top of here.
But you can use anything that your preference
there.
If you want to use granola or granola bars
or cereal just some sort of extra crunchy
carb source, just a sprinkle of top of this
and finish it off.
So, there's the finished product there.
The Greek yogurt with the peanut butter and
jam, stevia and cinnamon, all mixed together.
The fruit on top, bananas and blueberries
and then the Weet-Bix bars on top of that.
So, again, a lot of this is personal preference.
You can kind of play around with it.
If you want to use a different fruit source,
go for it.
If you want to use a different sort of granola
bar on top, there's tons of options for that.
And then again, you can either add whey protein
or not, depending on your preference.
I really like this.
This particular version here is 30 grams of
protein, 75 carbs and 20 fat.
It's really easy to make.
It tastes really good.
And it has good balanced macros.
So, yes, I just wanted to show you guys what
I've been having for breakfast and give you
an idea if you want to try out something new
as well.
So, I'm just going to quickly have this and
get my day started here.
Thanks for watching guys.
Make sure to like, comment, subscribe, share,
all that good stuff.
You can check out my Body Transformation Blueprint
System at BodyTransformationtruth.com, the
link in the description.
And my official blog is over at Seannal.com.
Talk to you guys, again, soon.