What’s going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com with a quick
Q&A video here.
And the question today is how long should
you cut before bulking?
This is a common question I get.
What is the proper length of a cutting phase
and so I’m going to answer that question
here, assuming that your goal is the traditional
aesthetic physique, meaning that you want
to be both muscular and decently lean as well.
So the answer here is pretty straight forward
and that is that your cutting phase should
last however long it needs to last in order
for you to get down to around twelve percent
body fat, give or take.
If you want to be a bit leaner, maybe eleven
percent or ten percent, that’s fine.
And if you want to bulk from a slightly higher
percentage, maybe thirteen or fourteen percent
that’s usually okay as long as we’re talking
about a true thirteen to fourteen percent
and not a YouTube thirteen to fourteen percent,
which apparently equates to being morbidly
obese.
But around twelve percent where your abs is
decently visible in good lighting that would
be about the right point to start a lean bulk
from.
And for women that usually would mean somewhere
around about eighteen to twenty percent mark.
One of the big mistakes that a lot of beginners
make is trying to commit to a focus bulking
phase from too high a body fat percentage.
Keep in mind that anytime you put the primary
focus on gaining muscle, by eating in a calorie
surplus, you will gain some body fat along
the way and you’re never going to lose body
fat during that phase.
It’s a one way street.
So whatever fat you do gain is going to be
stuck with you throughout your entire bulking
phase, and you aren’t going to able to lose
that fat until you consciously decide to switch
gears and focus on fat loss.
So what often happens is that a guy will start
bulking from, say seventeen percent body fat
and then very quickly they start feeling unhappy
with how their body looks, and then they lose
motivation and they fall off track.
Even if you think that you don’t care about
gaining fat and that you just want to be big,
you’ll probably pretty quickly change your
mind once you actually start seeing that body
fat beginning to pile on.
It’s never fun and I don’t think that
anybody truly enjoys it.
So by committing to your cutting phase all
the way through until you get down to a good
twelve percent body fat or so, you’re going
to be setting yourself up for a much healthier
and better structured bulking phase because
as long as you go about it properly and you
only stick to a small and controlled calorie
surplus, you’ll be able to maintain a decent
level of leanness for a much longer period
of time.
And, if you like the way you look, then you’re
going to be much more motivated and your chances
of falling off track and then yoyo-ing back
and forth between bulking and cutting is going
to much lower, that’s a very common thing.
And also keep in mind that if you’re a beginner
and you structure your plan properly there’s
actually a decent chance that you’ll be
able to gain a bit of muscle while you’re
cutting down at the same time.
It won’t be to the same degree that you’d
get by eating in a straight surplus, but it
is possible to put on muscle during a cutting
phase, whereas during a bulking phase you’re
never going to lose body fat.
Now, some guys will say that they don’t
want to cut down first because they’re afraid
that it’s going to make them look too skinny.
But the reality is that if you have low levels
of muscular development in combination with
high body fat, and your ultimate goal is a
lean and muscular body then your initial phase
of training, whether you decide to bulk or
cut, is probably going to result in a physique
that temporarily you’re not satisfied with.
But if you truly want to build a great body
then you have to accept that it requires time
and patience and hard work, and there’s
no magic bullet that’s going to take you
straight from where you are now straight to
your ideal physique.
So you have to think long term here, and understand
that even if cutting down to twelve percent
body fat does temporarily give you a thinner
appearance, it’s ultimately just a stepping
stone on the path to your final goal.
And that it’s going to be an improvement
from where you are now regardless.
I mean, being skinny lean is still going to
be better than being skinny fat.
And again, keep in mind that you might actually
gain muscle during the process anyway.
So the bottom line here, how long should you
cut before bulking?
Assuming that your goal is to commit to a
focus bulking phase after your cut is over
and to gain some additional size and strength,
your cutting phase should last however long
it needs to last in order to get down to about
twelve percent body fat where your abs is
visible.
And the specific length of time that that’s
going to take really just depends on how high
your body fat levels are to begin with and
how closely you stick to your program.
And then once you get down to that twelve
percent level you can then shift the focus
from cutting to bulking.
And I’ll link a video that I did on that
a few weeks ago that outlines how to properly
make that transition.
I’ll link here on the screen and also in
the description box below.
So, I hope this was helpful.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows how to lay out a complete
cutting or bulking phase from A to Z, the
workouts the meal plans, supplement guides
and one-on-one coaching so that you can get
result as efficiently as possible then you
can check out my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by visiting www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
the link for that is in the description.
Make sure to follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already, the link for that
are also in the description.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
if you did enjoy the video make sure to hit
the like button, share, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.