Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
SeanNal.com and BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video I want to talk a bit about
genetics and how they relate to your muscle
building program.
So genetics play a large role in virtually
everything that we do.
We're all born with different skills and tendencies
and abilities, and these characteristics are
a product of the experiences that we have
throughout our lives and from the genes that
we inherited from our parents.
So, just as some people are naturally fast
runners, naturally talented musicians, naturally
skilled mathematicians, naturally good artists,
some of us are also naturally predisposed
to building muscle at faster rates.
It would be naive to assume that we are all
born on a 100% equal playing field when it
comes to building overall muscle size and
strength.
It's just not the case.
And there's definitely a connection between
genetics and building muscle and it can vary
quite a bit from person to person.
So here are a few of the basic genetic factors
that can come into play here.
The first is testosterone levels.
Testosterone is the most important muscle-building
hormone in your entire body, and some people
have naturally higher or lower levels.
Another is muscle fiber distribution.
Individuals with a higher percentage of fast-twitch
muscle fibers are going to have greater muscle-building
potential because fast-twitch fibers are more
prone to hypertrophy.
Another is muscular shape.
For the most part, there is very little that
you can do to influence the shape of an individual
muscle.
Muscles can become bigger or smaller, but
their actual shape is mostly genetically pre-determined.
Another factor is recovery ability.
Some of us can naturally tolerate more exercise
than others.
Individuals who can recover quicker naturally
have an advantage because they're going to
be able to successfully train and recover
more often than others.
There's also myostatin levels.
The myostatin gene codes to "limit" the amount
of muscle mass that you can build.
Now this gene will be more or less active
depending on the individual and this can certainly
come into play.
So these are just a few of the many factors
that play a role when examining the issue
of genetics and building muscle.
There's no doubt that Arnold Schwarzenegger
trained extremely hard to win the Mr. Olympia
contest 7 times, but without his amazing genetic
structure there's no question that things
would have been different there.
But the real question is... so what?
Whatever hand you were dealt in the genetics
department is what it is and it can't be changed.
All you can do is make the very best of what
you have and become the best that YOU can
be.
And this applies not only to bodybuilding,
but to every single area of life.
Whether you're able to gain muscle at an above
average rate, at an average rate or at a below
average rate is something that is set in stone
and can't be changed.
And to be honest, from a practical standpoint
it is absolutely irrelevant to your program.
Unless your goal is to become a world-class
bodybuilder, which is a feat that is almost
entirely dependent upon your genetics then
absolutely anyone out there can build an impressive,
muscular body as long as they are willing
to put forth the effort.
For some people it may simply take a shorter
or longer time than others.
It's really as simple as that.
You would have to be in the extreme lower
percentile of the "bad genetics" group for
it to be anywhere even close to a valid excuse
for not sticking to your muscle building program
over time.
For everyone else, the 99% plus, train hard,
eat right, stay focused and very good things
will happen as long as you are consistent.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you found the information useful here today
please make sure to hit the Like button, leave
a comment and subscribe to stay up to date
on future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.