What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, RealScienceAthletics.com,
continuing on with this little home quarantine
series here because that's the situation that
the vast majority of people watching this
video are currently in.
And today I want to talk a little bit about
the best way to approach your nutrition plan
during this time and answer the question as
to whether you should bulk cut or just maintain
at the moment.
So this is of course going to depend on the
individual.
It depends on things like the quality of your
training program, your food availability,
your mindset.
So let's go over a few points here so that
you can decide what's best for you.
So first things first, if food availability
is not an issue for you and you want to continue
bulking or continue cutting during this period,
the first thing you need to make sure of is
that you have a proper training program in
place, first.
This is very, very important.
I talked about this in my last two videos,
but that means you're continuing to train
your entire body.
You're taking the majority of your sets about
one to two rep short of failure, using sufficient
weekly volume, I think around 8 to 15 direct
sets per muscle is enough if you're truly
training hard.
And in the case of a bulk, you also need to
make sure that you're continuing to strive
for progressive overload over time.
And in my next video, I'll be going into more
detail on exactly how to do that if you only
have access to minimal weight or even just
your body weight.
Making sure that your training program is
properly laid out and properly executed is
extremely important because if you attempt
to eat in a calorie deficit or a calorie surplus,
but you don't have a proper training stimulus
in place, you could end up doing yourself
more harm than good potentially.
If you eat in a calorie surplus but your training
program is weak, then the muscle building
stimulus won't be strong enough and that will
cause your body to divert a high amount of
those extra calories toward your body fat
stores rather than toward muscle growth.
On the other hand, if you eat in a calorie
deficit but your training program is weak,
then you're going to be putting yourself at
risk for excessive muscle loss.
So having a proper training stimulus in place
first and foremost is the most important thing,
and you can download my free home upper lower
split using the link up here or in the description
box below if you are looking for an effective
training plan that lays everything out step
by step and that can be done at home with
minimal to no equipment.
Now if you do have a solid training program
in place and you're being consistent with
it and you're motivated to continue bulking
or cutting right now, then that's totally
fine and you can just go ahead with that.
About 2 to 300 calories above maintenance
is a good range for a lean bulk and about
3 to 500 calories below maintenance is a good
range for a sustainable cut.
You don't need to track exact macros.
What truly matters from a macronutrient perspective
is that you just get in enough daily protein,
so around 0.8 grams per pound of body weight
or higher.
And then from there your carb to fat ratio
is just a matter of personal preference depending
on what you enjoy most and what's most convenient
and what makes hitting your overall calorie
needs as easy and sustainable as possible
for you.
The one other factor I would take into account
here is your psychological state.
So if this whole situation that we're in right
now is causing you a lot of stress either
because of fear of the virus, you know if
you have underlying health issues or someone
close to you does, or maybe you're a healthcare
worker or someone who does have a higher likelihood
of being exposed, aside from that maybe the
social isolation of being quarantined is causing
you a lot of mental stress.
Maybe you're having financial issues right
now.
If you are struggling with any of that right
now, then you might want to think twice about
being in a calorie deficit during this period.
Because when you are consistently eating below
maintenance, that's probably just going to
make things even harder and it'll probably
just exacerbate whatever anxiety and depression
you might be feeling right now.
That may not be true for everyone and if continuing
to push for your fat loss goals gives you
a sense of purpose and some structure right
now, and you find that helpful, then that's
your call.
But I think for most people, if your mental
state is feeling particularly fragile right
now, it's probably best not to actively restrict
calories and to instead give your mind and
your body the calories and the nutrition it
needs for optimal functioning.
Okay, so far we've established that if your
training program is on point and your food
availability and mental state is fine, then
continuing to bulk or cut is okay during this
period if that's what you feel motivated to
do.
The other scenario here is sort of that in
between gray area.
So that could mean, like I just mentioned,
you're under a lot of psychological stress
right now, or it could mean that maybe you
are continuing to train, but your program
isn't the greatest because you really are
limited on the exercises that you can do,
or maybe your food availability is a bit compromised
because of financial reasons or you're just
trying to stay away from the grocery store
as much as possible.
Or maybe you are just okay with the idea of
doing things at a lower intensity right now
until things settle down and the gyms reopen,
and you're fine with the idea of just roughly
maintaining your existing body composition.
Okay, if that's the case, then all you really
need to do nutrition-wise is to just focus
on two main things.
Number one is to not go excessively high or
excessively low on calories.
And number two is to consume enough daily
protein, okay?
The truth is that if you just do those two
basic things and you have some type of reasonable
training stimulus in place, you know you're
hitting each muscle at least once a week,
you're getting at least within maybe three
to four reps of failure on your sets, which
is not hard to do.
Then as long as you don't go excessively high
or excessively low on calories and you eat
enough protein, so 0.8 grams per pound of
body weight daily, which is also fairly easy
for most people to do, especially if you have
some sort of protein powder handy, then nothing
significantly negative is going to happen
to you in terms of body composition.
Think about it, if you end up eating in a
small surplus, then your body fat gains will
be kept to a minimum and you might even build
some muscle if your training program is still
decent, okay?
If you eat at maintenance, then you'll just
maintain your existing body composition for
the most part, and you can just consider this
period as being a pause in your program where
you're not moving forward, but you're also
not moving backward, which is actually a win
in and of itself given the challenges that
we're facing right now.
And then if you end up eating in a small to
moderate deficit, then you'll primarily just
lose body fat.
Maybe a small amount of lean tissue if your
training program isn't that great, but probably
not much if it's just happening over the shorter
term.
So the bottom line is that as long as calories
don't go too high or too low and you get in
enough protein and you're continuing to train
to some reasonable degree, nothing really
bad is going to happen.
The only way your body composition is going
to degrade to a significant degree is if you
go excessively high on calories for a prolonged
period, in which case you'll gain excess body
fat, or if you go excessively low on calories
for a prolonged period, in which case you
might lose some muscle or if your protein
intake drops very low, in which case you'll
also lose some muscle from that.
So to sum all of this up, continuing to bulk
or cut is totally fine if you're motivated
to do that, as long as you have a reasonable
training program in place and food availability
is not an issue.
And on the other hand, if you do want to take
things a bit more slowly during this period
and you're mainly concerned with not regressing
rather than actively progressing, then just
aim to eat somewhere around your maintenance
calories, give or take, without going too
high or too low and get your daily protein
in.
Of course, for optimal overall health, if
you are still able to, then you still want
to try and stick to primarily minimally processed
whole foods, getting your fruits and veggies,
drink plenty of water.
Everyone's situation is different, so it might
be easier or harder for some people to do
that, but if we're specifically talking just
about body composition period, then total
calories and total protein are by far the
most important thing.
As far as supplementation goes, that can continue
on as normal if your financial situation allows
for it.
If you were previously using a pre-workout
but now your training sessions are a bit lower
intensity, then that might not be necessary
for now.
That's up to you.
On the other hand, if you're still training
hard, you're going close to failure and you're
actively pushing for more progress, then continuing
to use a pre-workout is fine.
And then other basics like a multivitamin
and a fish oil, those are of course fine to
continue with and can actually help to keep
your immune system strong right now if you're
using proper formulations.
It's certainly not some sort of Coronavirus
cure like I've seen other supplement companies
claiming just to try and make a quick buck,
but certain micronutrients like vitamin D,
zinc, magnesium, those all do contribute to
proper immune functioning, and the Omega-3
fatty acids in fish oil do as well.
I personally take these every day, and Real
Science Athletics, which is the fitness supplement
line I personally formulated using only research-backed
ingredients in their highest quality forms
and full clinical doses.
We're currently offering a 20% discount on
our pre-workout multivitamin and fish oil
with coupon code TAKEOFF20.
That'll help you access our products at a
lower cost during this time where maybe finances
are a bit more limited.
And I'll keep that discount on for the next
week until April 25th.
So that's the video, guys.
If you have any questions, then feel free
to post them in the comments below.
Hit the like button if this was helpful and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
And you can also follow me over on Instagram
as well for more daily tips that will help
you get the very most out of your fitness
program during this time and moving forward
into the future as well.
Thanks for watching and I will see you in
the next video.