What's up?
This is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I want to talk about the concept
of muscle confusion.
Now, the idea that you have to constantly
change up your exercises, rep range and workout
structure in order to shock or confuse your
muscles into new growth has been a fairly
common piece of bodybuilding advice that you've,
no doubt, heard about.
And the idea behind this is that after following
a certain weight training routine for a set
period of time, the muscles are going to adapt,
plateau and eventually stop responding.
And because of this a lot of lifters will
end up haphazardly switching from routine
to routine because they were afraid that their
muscle growth is going to slow down if they
don't.
So, they'll switch up their exercises, use
different rep ranges, change up their -- the
order of their lifts, and train using, you
know, different muscle groupings in the hopes
that the change is somehow going to confuse
the body and force it to continue growing
bigger and stronger.
Now, the reality behind this is that it's
complete and total nonsense.
Your muscles don't have a mind of their own.
They're not sitting there analyzing the movements
that you're performing, which tool you're
using to perform it, whether it's a barbell,
or a dumbbell or a cable, how many times you're
doing it or in what manner you're executing
it.
Your muscles simply perform the movement patterns
that you carry out in the gym, and then they
respond to the overall load and the intensity.
If you regularly perform barbell rows and
you switch to performing dumbbell rows, your
muscles are not magically thinking to themselves,
"Oh no, he's using dumbbells now, we better
pack on some extra muscle mass this time."
As long as you train with sufficient intensity
and you focus on progressive overload from
week to week, your muscles are going to continue
growing larger and stronger as long as proper
rest, proper nutrition and injury prevention
are all taken into account.
You know, if it were true that the body only
responds to certain exercises for a set period
of time, then how could powerlifters go through
a lifetime of performing squats, deads and
bench presses while seeing continual improvement
from start to finish?
Plateaus do exist, but they are completely
within your control and they have nothing
to do with your muscles somehow failing to
react based on the repetitive use of the same
routine.
So, instead of haphazardly changing your training
style, take a look at other potential factors
that could be causing your gains to slow down.
This could include things like insufficient
calorie intake, inadequate training intensity,
overtraining, injuries, joint weakness, improper
rest, et cetera, there's a ton of other factors
you can look at.
Is it possible to change from one routine
to another and see a difference in results?
Well, of course, but this has nothing to do
with the muscles being confused or shocked
by the change.
It's just a different types of training programs
and different types of exercises yield different
results.
You know, a program that uses low to moderate
reps and focuses on hypertrophy is going to
produce a different result than an endurance
program that uses high reps or a strength
building program that uses very low reps.
Obviously, switching from one style to another
or even landing somewhere in between is going
to produce a different physical response from
your body.
Is it okay to switch up your routine every
couple months for a change?
Yes, if you -- if you want to change things
for mental variety, if you want to change
things to accommodate an existing injury or
just to focus on a different goal, then go
right ahead, you know.
Just don't make the mistake of thinking that
switching from tricep press-downs to dips
is going to shock your triceps into new growth
or that training your shoulders paired up
with your legs instead of with your chest
is somehow going to confuse your body into
packing on more muscle onto your shoulders.
As long as you train hard and consistently,
as long as you continue making adjustments
to your intensity and your volume, and as
long as you stay on top of your -- your nutrition,
it's perfectly possible to use the exact same
routine for even years on end and continue
to see new gains in muscle size and strength.
So, I hope you found this information useful.
To grab your fully structured step-by-step
muscle building program that includes a free
workout plan, meal plan and supplement plan,
make sure to grab the "No Fail" system over
on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description bar for that.
Also make sure to join the Elite Impact Lab's
Facebook page, where we do free supplement
giveaways every Sunday night.
And make sure to subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all of our future videos.
So, thanks again, for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free muscle building tips.
See you.