Strength before size? Could aiming to increase 
your strength first, defined as increasing  
your one-repetition maximum on an exercise, help 
you build more muscle with that exercise later?  
A new study by Carvalho and colleagues explored 
just this. They recruited 26 men with an average of  
4 and a half years of training experience, who 
could score at least 1.5 times their respective  
body weight. Subjects were split into pairs based 
on having similar vastus lateralis thickness.  
In each pair, one subject was assigned to a 
hypertrophy group, while the other subject  
was assigned to a strength plus hypertrophy group. 
Both groups trained twice per week for 8 weeks,  
training the back squat and leg press 
each session. The hypertrophy group  
for all of their sessions, trained each exercise 
with 4 sets of 8 to 12 reps to failure,  
the point at which no more repetitions can be 
performed, and 1 minute of rest between sets.  
The strength plus hypertrophy group, for the first 
three weeks, trained each exercise with 4 sets  
of 1 to 3 reps to failure and 3 minutes 
of rest between sets This was their strength phase.  
For the last 5 weeks, they trained identically 
to the hypertrophy group. So they trained each  
exercise with 4 sets of 8 to 12 reps 
to failure and 1 minute of rest between sets.  
This was their hypertrophy phase. I should note 
that both the hypertrophy group and strength  
plus hypertrophy group, before this 8 week 
experimental protocol, had a 3-week lead-in  
period where they both trained identically. But we 
don't really need to worry about this. Measurements  
were taken just before the 8-week experimental 
protocol, just after the 3rd week, which remember,  
is when the strength phase would have just ended 
for the strength plus hypertrophy group, and just  
after the 8 weeks. The measurements were a one- 
rep max test on the back squat and leg press, for  
strength gains. And for hypertrophy, thickness of 
the vastus lateralis measured at 60%
of the thigh length. Increases in one-rep max 
on the back squat and leg press at the 3rd
week and after the 8 weeks were significantly 
greater for the strength plus hypertrophy group  
compared to the hypertrophy group. These results 
make sense, the current evidence indicates training  
with relatively heavy loads and therefore lower 
repetitions produces the greatest increases in  
one-rep max strength. The strength plus hypertrophy 
group spent their first three weeks training with  
1 to 3 reps for both exercises. Furthermore,  
the strength gains developed from this phase  
actually allowed them to use heavier loads 
during their following hypertrophy phase.  
Remember, during weeks 3 to 8 of the 
study, both groups were training identically.  
They used 8 to 12 reps on the back squat and leg 
press. Yet, the strength plus hypertrophy group  
used heavier loads on both exercises. Moving on, 
increases in vastus lateralis thickness at week 3  
favored the hypertrophy group. However, by the end 
of the 8th week, increases in vastus lateralis
thickness were greater for the strength plus 
hypertrophy group. In other words, although the  
strength phase did not immediately produce much 
growth for the strength plus hypertrophy group,  
it seemed to have boosted the muscle 
growth experienced in the hypertrophy phase.  
So much so that the strength plus hypertrophy 
group experienced overall greater gains by the  
end of the study. These are some really intriguing 
results. What might explain them? Remember,  
during the last 5 weeks of the study, 
both groups trained identically. Despite them  
using 8 to 12 reps to failure, the strength plus 
hypertrophy group were able to use heavier loads,  
likely thanks to their prior strength phase. 
The author speculated using heavier weights  
in the hypertrophy phase meant the strength plus 
hypertrophy group experienced greater mechanical  
tension and hence greater muscle growth. In other 
words, heavier loads mean more mechanical tension  
and therefore more hypertrophy. However, I'd 
argue this is unlikely and slightly misleading.  
Let's explore why. Mechanical tension is currently 
the best understood mechanism of muscle growth.  
A large component of this is active tension . Active 
tension is equal to the force generated by the  
contractile units of a muscle. Simply put, higher 
levels of muscle fiber recruitment and high levels  
of force produced by those recruited muscle fibers 
would mean high levels of active tension. A great  
stimulus for hypertrophy. Muscles produce force 
progressively. When your effort is low there are  
low numbers of recruited muscle fibers and low 
force produced by some recruited muscle fibers.  
As your effort increases, increased muscle fiber 
recruitment and increased force produced by  
those recruited muscle fibers occurs. During the 
last 5 weeks, both groups trained with 8
to 12 reps to failure. All subjects would 
have been exerting the same relative effor.t  
They all used a load that enabled them to perform 
8 to 12 reps to failure. So, they all would have  
been experiencing high levels of active tension. 
The fact that the strength plus hypertrophy group  
used heavier loads does not matter. The relative 
stimulus for both groups was the same. To drive  
this point home, imagine we had a complete beginner 
and an individual with three years of training  
experience use a load they could only complete for 
8 reps on the back squat. The beginner would  
require a fairly light load, whereas the trained 
individual would be using a much heavier load.  
Would the trained individual grow more from doing 
this simply because he's using a heavier load?  
Probably not. In fact, this would likely be a much 
better stimulus for the untrained individual,   
simply due to the novelty of this event for him. 
There is another potential reason relating to  
mechanical tension that could help explain the 
study results. As mentioned, high levels of muscle  
fiber recruitment and force produced by those 
recruited muscle fibers are a large component  
of mechanical tension. Interestingly, there is some 
research suggesting training with heavier loads  
results in greater neural adaptations that 
enable a person to experience greater muscle  
fiber recruitment and/or greater force produced 
by those recruited muscle fibers. Therefore, it's  
possible the strength plus hypertrophy group in 
the last 5 weeks, despite training with the same  
relative effort, would have been able to recruit 
more muscle fibers and/or produce greater force  
with the recruited muscle fibers, thanks to the 
neural adaptations from their previous strength  
phase. However a limitation of this argument 
is that some evidence suggests that neural  
adaptations primarily occur in the early months of 
a person's training career, with little thereafter.  
The subjects of the study had an average of 4
and a half years of training experience So it's  
questionable whether they would even be able to 
experience meaningful neural adaptations. That said,  
I have come across some evidence indicating even 
very trained individuals can still experience  
neural adaptations, so ultimately it's not 
completely clear. A final potential reason  
that could explain the study results relates to 
re-sensitization. As mentioned, the subjects had  
an average of 4 and a half years of training 
experience. Unfortunately, the authors of the study  
did not report how the subjects trained previously .
But, given the popularity of using 8-12 reps,  
it's possible they consistently trained with this 
rep range before this study. Taking some time off  
from using 8-12 reps and training with 1 to 
3 reps for a couple of weeks, as the strength  
plus hypertrophy group did in their strength phase, could re-sensitize an individual. Meaning that  
when they returned to using 8-12 reps in their 
hypertrophy phase, they were more sensitive to  
this rep range and gained more muscle as a result. 
But, this is just a hypothesis i'm not aware of any  
strong evidence to support this claim. Moving on, 
it's important to remember this is only one study.  
Unfortunately, there are no other studies with an 
identical or near identical design to this study.   
However, there is research somewhat related that 
would reduce our enthusiasm about the results.  
Prestes and colleagues split 20 women with 
at least 6 months of training experience  
into a linear or reverse linear group. Both 
groups trained 3 times per week for 12 weeks.  
They alternated between workout A and workout 
B. Each exercise was trained for 3 sets.  
The linear group throughout the 12 weeks gradually 
progressed from using a load they could perform  
12 to 14 reps with to a load they could 
perform 4 to 6 reps with. So they just  
increased the load used and decreased the 
number of reps performed on their exercises.  
The reverse linear group did the opposite of this, 
throughout the 12 weeks, they gradually progressed  
from using a load they could perform 4 to 6 reps with 
to a load they could perform 12 to 14 reps with.  
On weeks 4, 8, and 12 both groups performed 12 
reps on their exercise sets. These weeks were  
recovery weeks. they also only trained twice on 
these weeks. the reverse linear group is slightly  
comparable to the strength plus hypertrophy 
group in the Carvalho and colleague study. In  
that they began with low reps and heavy weight and 
ended with more traditional hypertrophy training.  
However, increases in fat-free mass, measured by 
skin fold calipers, were significantly greater for  
the linear group versus the reverse linear group. 
Now, skinfold calipers aren't the best measurement  
tool for muscle growth. MRI or ultrasound, as 
was used in the Carvalho and colleague study,  
is considered much more reliable and 
accurate, so we should keep this in mind.  
Nonetheless, this study does somewhat conflict 
with the Carvalho and colleague study. Looking at  
other research, if implementing low rep training 
in a hypertrophy oriented program could improve  
muscle growth, we would expect alternating your rep 
ranges to produce greater muscle growth than using  
only one rep range. But, as we detailed in our last 
video, the research finds no difference between  
alternating rep ranges or using a constant rep 
range for hypertrophy, at least in the short term.  
12 weeks or less. The Carvalho and colleagues 
study did only last 8 weeks, so it somewhat  
conflicts with this area of research. Moreover, the 
research generally demonstrates that if you use  
different rep ranges in your training program, 
the way you organize them does not seem to impact  
muscle growth. Again, at least in the short term. A 
meta-analysis by Grgic and colleagues combined  
the results of studies comparing linear to daily 
undulating periodization. Linear periodization  
,very generally, involves gradually increasing 
the load you use on an exercise and performing  
fewer reps as a result, over many weeks. Conversely, 
daily undulating periodization typically involves  
mixing different rep ranges into a weekly 
schedule. The analysis found no significant  
difference between the two periodization 
models for increasing measures of muscle growth.  
At the end of the day, I don't believe we have 
sufficient data to confidently suggest getting  
strong first increases hypertrophy later. Though, 
much of the opposing evidence to the Carvalho and  
colleagues study is indirect. I think the idea 
of re-sensitization that we covered earlier is  
intriguing. If the strength plus hypertrophy group 
experienced greater hypertrophy because they were  
re-sensitized to the 8-12 rep range, technically, 
none of the indirect data we looked at could  
refute this. Hopefully future research that is 
identical or near identical to the study emerge.  
This should enable greater insight. And of course, if this happens, I do plan to create updated videos.