What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here, www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video here I wanted to answer
the question of “How to get rid of loose
skin after losing weight.”
This is an issue that a lot of people asking
about.
They were overweight, they put in the hard
work to lean down but now they’re frustrated
because of that loose skin that’s still
hanging around afterwards.
So how do you tighten up loose skin?
First off, it’s important to understand
that this is an issue that will vary hugely
form person to person because it does depend
on so many different factors.
For example, the older you are the more likely
you’ll be to have issues with loose skin,
since your skin does loose elasticity with
age.
How overweight you were to begin with obviously
plays a role as well.
How fast you gain that weight is also another
factor, so if it happened very suddenly then
you’d probably more likely to run into issues
with loose skin in comparison to someone who
gain it more gradually over a lifetime.
And also how fast you lost the weight can
come into play as well, because the faster
you lose the fat the less time your skin is
going to have to adapt.
Sun exposure can also play a role, diet and
then aside from that are just basic genetics
because some people will just naturally have
more elastic skin than others.
Now, aside from all of that, the key point
that I want to make in this video is that
in a very high percentage of cases the issue
isn’t actually loose skin but instead it’s
just an issue of excess subcutaneous fat that’s
still clinging to the inside of the skin.
Skin itself is actually extremely thin, and
so if you’re able to grab on to it and it’s
much thicker than a few millimeters, your
focus shouldn’t be on eliminating loose
skin at all but instead it should just be
on continuing to lose body fat and leaning
down further.
Loose skin obviously is a legitimate issue
for some people but unless you’ve truly
gotten down to around 10% or 11% body fat
as a male, and maybe around 18% or 19% as
a female you really shouldn’t be thinking
about loose skin at all until you do.
And I say truly gotten down to those body
fat percentages because most people really
underestimate how high their body fat percentage
actually is.
I get questions from people all the time who
send their progress photos and then say that
they’re at 10% body fat when I can clearly
see that they’re at least 15% or higher.
So, make sure you’re being honest with yourself
and if this is a serious issue for you and
you really want to be sure, then you can go
ahead and get your body fat tested just to
get a reasonably close estimate as to what
percentage you’re actually at.
Now, aside from losing body fat the other
very simple thing you can do is just build
more muscle.
So if you’ve been focusing primarily on
fat loss and you’ve gotten down to that
fairly lean body fat percentage, and you still
do notice a bit of sagging or sort of looseness
in your skin then shifting into a muscle building
phase and adding more lean mass is going to
help to fill your physique out a bit more
and that of course is going to cause your
skin to automatically tighten up along with
it as well.
So, in a very high percentage of cases simply
leaning down further in combination with gaining
muscle and then giving your skin time to adapt,
that’s going to take care of a good portion
if not all of your loose skin issue.
You can also take basic steps to maximize
your skin health and elasticity by eating
a micro nutrient rich diet with plenty of
fruit and vegetables, consuming adequate protein
each day around 0.8 to 1 gram of protein per
pound of bodyweight, you want to stay properly
hydrated throughout the day, getting in a
sufficient intake of essential fatty acids
and avoiding unhealthy habits like smoking
or excessive sun exposure.
Now, if you are a more extreme case where
you were significantly overweight and you
lost a large amount of fat and you’ve truly
lean down to 10% or 11% as a male, 18% or
19% as a female, you’ve put in the effort
to add some quality muscle mass, you’ve
given your skin time to adapt and you still
have a significant amount loose skin that
you’re not happy with, in those cases you’re
going to have to speak to your doctor because
there’s probably nothing that’s going
to get rid of it aside from surgery.
Things like loose skin creams, supplements,
body wraps, all this stuff is highly unlikely
to do anything for you and it’s almost certainly
just going to be a waste of money.
And surgery probably would be your last resort
option if it is something that you’re really
serious about.
I wish I could provide some sort of other
solution but in cases where there is significant
loose skin remaining even though you are lean
and have gained muscle, I don’t know if
anything other than surgical intervention
that would actually get rid of it.
But keep in mind that it can be fairly expensive
and it’s not a small surgery, so make sure
you’ve done everything you can to get in
to your best shape possible in terms of optimizing
your body composition and make sure that this
is something that you’re truly serious about
before considering surgery as an option.
And the last thing I’d closed this video
out with is to say that, don’t allow the
idea of loose skin to deter you from losing
body fat and getting in to better shape, if
you’re overweight right now.
Loose skin doesn’t affect everyone, the
skin is adaptable and often tightening up
on its own as you improve your body composition
and in any case you’ll likely be much happier
at a healthy bodyweight but with a bit of
loose skin as opposed to being overweight.
Not just for what it will do for your appearance
but also for your overall health.
So guys, if you found this advice helpful
and you want to get a step-by-step plan that
will help you lose fat, gain muscle and optimize
your body composition as effectively as possible;
the work-outs, the meal plans, the supplement
guides along with one-on-one coaching then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading over to www.BodyTransormationTruth.com
using the link in the description box.
If you enjoyed the video as always, make sure
to hit the like button, leave a comment and
subscribe to stay up to date on future videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
The links for that are in the description
box.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I’ll talk to you again soon.