Hey, this is Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com.
And today, I'm going to be doing a review
on myostatin inhibitor supplements.
Now, myostatin is a protein that is encoded
into the MSTN gene in humans.
And it's produced mainly in skeletal muscle
cells.
Now, its functions in adult humans are not
fully understood as of yet.
But myostatin is believed to inhibit muscle
growth in order to keep it within a certain
limit.
Research has shown that by blocking the myostatin
gene in mice, the result is a very dramatic
increase in muscle size that otherwise would
not have been possible.
Similar experiments have also been done on
cattle in order to grow livestock with more
meat and less fat.
So, once the myostatin gene and its function
were discovered, supplement companies of course
they started creating myostatin inhibitors
to reduce the activity of the myostatin gene
-- the myostatin gene, sorry.
And this would then remove the limit that
myostatin imposes on trainees and allow them
to make gains in muscle mass beyond their
genetic limits so to speak.
Most myostatin inhibitors are made up of a
brown seaweed extract, which I'm not 100%
sure, how to pronounce.
I'm not going to bother.
But it was found that when this extract was
placed in a test tube, it would actually bind
to myostatin.
So, that sounds kind of interesting on paper,
but that's pretty much as far as it goes.
First of all, the truth is that scientists
still don't even fully understand myostatin's
role in the muscle building process.
It does seem pretty clear that myostatin essentially
codes to place limitations on muscle growth,
but there's not a whole lot of clear cut knowledge
beyond that.
You know, how exactly does myostatin limit
muscle growth?
Can we actually alter this gene in humans
and see measureable results?
This still is not known.
And if those are the cutting edge of the research
still don't fully understand it, you can be
pretty sure that the supplement companies
that are selling myostatin inhibitors don't
know either.
In any case, if in fact we can affect the
myostatin genes to open up the floodgates
of muscle growth, it's almost certain at this
point that ingesting brown seaweed extract
is probably not the way to do it.
Many supplement companies promoting their
myostatin inhibitors will often use pictures
of the experimental mice, and the cattle whose
myostatin genes were altered.
You can Google images to that and you'll -- you'll
find that really easily.
But what they don't tell you is that those
alterations were achieved through state-of-the-art
genetic engineering using cell cloning and
pre-birth gene manipulation, and other stuff
that I don't even know anything about.
You know, they didn't hand the mice and the
cattle a glass of water and a brown seaweed
pill.
So, it does seem pretty clear that myostatin
is an important factor in relation to the
buildup of muscle mass.
And as time goes on scientists probably will
uncover more and more facts about the gene
and how it works.
But in any case, one thing remains certain.
And that is that there is not a single shred
of testable, empirical evidence that the brown
seaweed extract found in over priced myostatin
blockers has even the slightest impact on
the inhibition of the myostatin gene or that
it contributes to any measureable increase
in lean muscle mass or strength.
And this supplement is a perfect example of
just how careful you need to be when choosing
supplement product.
Just because something is written in print
does not make it true.
Supplementation is a great addition to any
effective muscle building program.
But it should always be based on logic, reasoning
and empirical research.
So, thanks for watching this video.
If you do want to check out some no B.S.
legit bodybuilding supplements that actually
do work, make sure to check out our products
over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link is in the description bar for that.
Also make sure to join us over on the Elite
Impact Lab's Facebook page, where we do free
supplement giveaways every Sunday night.
And make sure to subscribe to stay up-to-date
on all of our future video lessons.
So, thanks again for watching this video lesson.
I hope you found it useful.
And I'll talk to you again soon.