Rows and lat-pulldowns are probably two of  
the most popular back and biceps 
exercises performed in a program.
As far as back development goes, the 
inclusion of these two exercises in a program  
can be a good idea, as they may be complementary.
The back consists of numerous muscles. Logically,  
as these two exercises require 
pulling motions at different angles,  
it would make sense that they should target 
different muscles of the back more so than others.
However, what about biceps development?
How do rows compare to 
lat-pulldowns for biceps growth?
Moreover, could the combination 
of rows and lat-pulldowns  
be enough for maximizing biceps hypertrophy?
Let us evaluate the evidence.
One potential way to assess the effectiveness 
of rows and lat pulldowns for biceps growth  
is to compare them to isolation 
biceps exercises, like biceps curls.
Isolation biceps exercises, like biceps curls, 
should logically be near ideal for biceps growth,  
as they confine tension to the biceps 
and ensure it is the limiting factor.
If lat pulldowns and rows can produce similar 
overall biceps hypertrophy to isolation biceps  
exercises, we have some evidence to suggest that 
they could be sufficient for biceps development.
Assessing the lat pulldown first, Gentil et 
al. compared them to the barbell biceps curl.
29 untrained men were assigned 
to train either the lat pulldown  
or barbell biceps curl 2 times 
per week for a total of 10 weeks.
Each session, subjects trained their respective 
exercise for 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions to failure  
(the point at which no more 
repetitions can be performed).
Thickness of the right elbow flexors 
(including the biceps and brachialis muscles)  
was measured 10 centimeters 
from the cubital fossa.
Increases in elbow flexor thickness were similar 
between the lat pulldown and barbell curl groups.
Therefore, this study suggests that lat pulldowns 
may be similarly effective to barbell bicep curls  
for biceps development.
However, elbow flexor growth was only 
measured at one region (10 centimeters  
from the cubital fossa). As we'll establish 
soon, this is may be an important limitation.
As for rows, Mannarino et al. compared 
dumbbell rows to dumbbell curls.
10 untrained men had one arm assigned to 
train dumbbell rows, while their other  
arm trained dumbbell curls. Training was 
carried out two times per week for 8 weeks.
They trained each arm with 4-6 sets 
of 8-12 repetitions to failure.
Thickness of the elbow flexors (including 
the biceps and brachialis muscles)  
was measured at 25%, 50%, 
and 75% of the biceps length.  
The following results average out these 
three regions to obtain a single value.
Increases in elbow flexor 
thickness were significantly  
greater for the arm trained with dumbbell curls.
Therefore, this study indicates rows are inferior 
for biceps growth compared to bicep curls.
I should mention that in this study, 
subjects performed both the curl  
and row with a supinated grip.
But, for the purposes of this study 
(assessing biceps growth), supination  
would unlikely put rows at a disadvantage. In 
fact, supination would likely help biceps growth,  
given supination is one of the biceps functions.
Despite this, rows still 
were inferior to bicep curls.
Now, I want to mention a potential 
problem some may have noticed.
Looking carefully back at the data of the studies, 
the Gentil et al. study found that lat pulldowns  
and barbell bicep curls resulted in a roughly 
6% increase in elbow flexor thickness,  
while the Mannarino et al. study found that 
rows similarly increased elbow flexor thickness  
by roughly 5%. Conversely, the dumbbell curls 
increased elbow flexor thickness by 11.06%.
Based on these numbers, you could 
argue that dumbbell bicep curls seem  
to be superior for biceps growth, while 
lat pulldowns, rows, and barbell curls  
(although producing similar biceps 
growth between them) are inferior.
However, this argument has its problems.
In all likelihood, dumbbell 
curls and barbell curls  
are probably similarly 
effective for biceps growth.
Different exercise modalities do not 
seem to have an impact on muscle growth.
In a previous video,  
we demonstrated that machines seem to produce 
similar muscle growth to free weights.
Moreover, we've also shown 
how bodyweight exercises,  
like the push-up, can produce similar hypertrophy 
to free weights, like the bench press.
The reason for this is probably because all 
modalities can elicit sufficiently high levels  
of mechanical tension, as I detailed 
in the free weight vs machine video.
These lines of evidence and 
reasoning would go against  
the idea that there's something 
special about dumbbell curls.
As an extra side note, these lines of 
evidence also explain why I think that  
despite the Mannarino et al. finding 
dumbbell rows to be inferior to curls,  
the results are also probably 
relevant to barbell rowing variations.
Anyway, logically, dumbbell and barbell curls 
involve more or less identical motions at the  
elbow. Moreover, in the studies, subjects 
performed 8-12 repetitions to failure.  
Combining these ideas, both 
the dumbbell and barbell curls  
would likely have induced 
similar tension on the biceps.
So, why did the dumbbell curl still 
produce the greatest percentage gains?
All in all, it's most likely 
not sensible to combine  
and analyze the two studies by 
Gentil and Mannarino together.
Firstly, the Mannario et al. study used slightly 
higher volumes. Subjects performed 4-6 sets per  
session for their exercises compared 
to 3 sets in the Gentil et al. study.
More sets seem to cause more muscle 
growth (likely up to a certain point,  
probably when recovery abilities are diminished). 
Therefore, more sets in the Mannario et al. study  
could partly explain the higher percentage 
gains observed with the dumbbell curls.
Secondly, the two studies did not measure the 
biceps identically. The Gentil et al. study only  
took measurements at one region (10 centimeters 
from the cubital fossa), whereas the Mannario  
et al. took measurements (and then averaged) 
from 25%, 50%, and 75% of the muscles length.
Lastly, and probably quite importantly, the 
studies were comprised of different subjects.  
Individual differences in 
responses to training are notable.
For instance, a study by Hubal 
et al. had 243 men and 342 women  
train their biceps with preacher and 
concentration curls for 12 weeks.
The graph depicts how varied the subject's 
increases in biceps cross-sectional area was.
Most resistance training studies, like the 
Gentil and Mannario studies, have a fairly  
small sample size (10-30 subjects). 
 
The probability of these two studies  
recruiting subjects with a comparable 
ability to gain muscle is unlikely.
As a result, the simple fact these two 
studies used different subjects may further  
partly explain why the dumbbell curls produced 
greater growth in the Mannario et al. study.
So, returning to the core of the 
video, when assessing the two studies,  
although it seems that rows are far less 
effective than biceps curls for biceps growth,  
lat pulldowns may be similarly 
effective to bicep curls.
From this, you may be tempted to think that 
rows and lat pulldowns could be sufficient  
for biceps development, given lat pulldowns 
may be itself enough for growing the biceps.
However, as alluded to earlier, 
the study by Gentil et al.  
finding lat pulldowns produced similar biceps 
growth to bicep curls is limited as it only  
measured elbow flexor growth at one region 
(10 centimeters from the cubital fossa).
Conversely, the study by Mannario et al.  
measured (and then averaged) 
three regions across the biceps  
(25%, 50%, and 75% of the muscle's length), making 
it more insightful for overall biceps development.
The reason why it is useful to measure 
growth at many regions of a muscle  
is that muscles do not appear to grow uniformly.
Although Gentil et al. found similar 
growth between the lat pulldown  
and barbell biceps curl at one region 
of the muscle, it's quite possible at  
other regions, growth responses would 
be different between the two exercises.
And this brings us on to probably the 
most important point of the video.
The research would appear to suggest that to 
maximize growth across regions of a muscle,  
a fair degree of exercise variation is important.
This would indicate that rows and lat pulldowns 
are not sufficient for optimal biceps development.
A study by Costa et al. demonstrates this nicely.
They had 22 detrained men train 
3 times per week for 9 weeks.
One group of subjects trained 
their biceps with lat pulldowns  
and barbell bicep curls each session.
Another group of subjects varied 
their exercises each week.
On day 1 of each week, their biceps 
were also trained with lat pulldowns  
and barbell bicep curls.
But on day 2 of each week, they trained with lat 
pulldowns behind the neck and preacher curls,  
and on day 3 of each week, lat pulldowns with 
a narrow grip and incline dumbbell curls.
As a note, both groups trained each 
exercise with 3 sets of 8-12 repetitions.
Before and after the study, 
thickness of the elbow flexors  
was measured at 50%, 60%, and 70% of 
the upper arm length for both groups.
Overall, increases in thickness were 
greater for the group that varied their  
exercises, particularly at 50% 
and 60% of the upper arm length.
Therefore, front lat pulldowns 
and barbell biceps curl  
were inferior to a variety of lat 
pulldowns and curl variations.
It's not clear whether it was the variation 
of lat pulldowns, variation of curls,  
or even the combination of both that produced 
the superior results for the varied group,  
but this study nonetheless demonstrates 
that a fair amount of exercise variety  
is beneficial for regional muscle 
growth, likely indirectly indicating  
rows and lat pulldowns are not sufficient 
for overall biceps development.