What's going on guys.
Sean Nalewanyj, SeanNal.com, Real ScienceAthletics.com.
And in this video we're talking about the
subject of intuitive eating.
So can you lose fat effectively without any
form of caloric tracking at all by just estimating
your intake on the go and eating according
to your body's hunger signals and based on
how you feel?
Before I jump into the subject, if you're
new to the channel and you find these tips
helpful today, don't forget to hit the subscribe
button below to stay updated on future videos,
and also make sure to follow me over on Instagram
as well, where I post daily muscle building
and fat loss tips, stories, personal updates,
and other info that you'll definitely want
to stay in the loop on.
It's @Sean_Nalewanyj, that's where you'll
find me when I'm not here on YouTube.
So first off, is it possible to lean down
and draw body fat consistently without tracking
daily calories?
The answer of course is yes, it is possible
and there are plenty of people out there who
do it.
However, as a general rule, I'd say this mostly
applies only in specific situations.
The first is if you're in the more intermediate
to advanced stages with your fitness plan
and you already have previous experience with
dietary tracking.
So you have a good general idea as to what
your maintenance calories are, a rough idea
of the nutritional content of the foods you're
eating, and you know how to listen to your
body and adjust your diet throughout the day
in order to land around the proper calorie
and macro ranges for yourself.
So you've already put in the work previously
to gain that skill and now you're able to
put things more on autopilot.
That's a situation where intuitive eating
will often work just fine, and as a longer
term goal, most people ultimately will want
to progress to that stage, because I don't
think anybody out there really wants to be
or needs to be a tracking calories for the
rest of their life, aside from temporary phases
where maybe you're really trying to dial in
your results more closely.
So a more intuitive style of eating should
be the ultimate end goal for most people.
And then the second situation would be, if
your current diet is just really poor overall.
So you're taking in a lot of obvious things
that you should be limiting, like, you know,
fast food, big restaurant meals, sodas, sweet
dessert types of foods, just really calorie
dense items that pack a lot of calories into
a small volume of food.
If you go ahead and just clean things up in
general by replacing a good chunk of those
foods with minimally processed whole foods,
you start eating more protein and veggies
to control your appetite, you start exercising
and expending more calories throughout the
day, then yes, chances are that you're going
to start losing body fat even without specifically
tracking anything, at least in the initial
stages.
So in those two scenarios, intuitive eating
is a viable option that can work quite well.
However, if you're still in the beginner stages
with your fat loss program, and you don't
have a lot of knowledge in terms of your body's
daily caloric needs and the caloric content
of the foods you're eating.
Your diet isn't horrible right now, maybe
it's not ideal, but it's not too bad.
And you're truly serious about getting a handle
on your health and fitness, losing body fat
and setting yourself up in the best way possible
over the long term, then tracking your diet
for at least a temporary period, is probably
going to be your best bet, and it could very
well make the difference between success and
failure with your fat loss goals.
It's become really common nowadays for people
to talk about the benefits of just eating
intuitively and "Listening to your body,"
and a lot of people out there want to sort
of demonize caloric tracking as if it's this
evil, unhealthy thing, but the reality is
that your body, in terms of the natural cravings
and the natural hunger signals that get put
out, it's not some sort of perfect system
because it's wired up for a much different
environment than the one that we live in today.
Okay.
The modern world as it is now, with the endless
abundance of food that we have everywhere,
and not just that, but hyper-palatable, calorically
dense, inexpensive food in large portion sizes
that you barely even need to expend any calories
to obtain, that's not normal to our physiology.
Okay, this world is the blink of an eye in
evolutionary history.
We evolved as hunter gatherers, where food
wasn't always readily available.
High Fat, high sugar items were very rare,
which is why they taste so good to us, because
if you've found something like that 50,000
years ago it was a very valuable item, and
our bodies are basically programmed to say
when there's food eat.
So if you take that natural evolutionary intuition
and then you transport it into today's world,
chances are that you're going to naturally
revert to at best eating at your calorie maintenance
level or eating in a calorie surplus, which
is why obesity rates are so high and they
just keep getting higher.
And no matter what anybody tries to tell you,
the underlying driver of fat loss is net energy
balance.
It comes from eating in a caloric deficit
where you're burning more energy than you're
consuming.
Eating a clean and healthy diet is great,
but it doesn't matter how healthy you eat
if your calories are just too high, period.
And keep in mind that your body is programmed
for survival first and foremost, and so, if
you go into a calorie deficit during the day
but you have nothing on paper to hold you
accountable because you're not tracking anything,
and you know, you feel that little bit of
background hunger at certain points, that
is completely normal during a fat loss phase,
but you're in this sort of intuitive eating
mindset and you automatically assume that
this is a bad thing, and that you need to
listen to your body, chances are that you're
going to overeat.
Maybe not into a surplus, but at least not
into a sufficient deficit that you need to
lose fat at a reasonable rate.
Excessive calorie restriction is obviously
not a good thing.
It's definitely not what I promote if you
follow my content, not in terms of calories
or in terms of food choices, but there's still
no way around the fact that in order to lose
body fat there does have to be a certain amount
of restriction involved.
Fat Loss is a restrictive process by nature,
just like fat gain is the opposite.
You know, people gain fat by overindulging
and so if you want to go in the opposite direction,
you have to do the opposite.
So the bottom line is this.
If you're currently following an intuitive
eating approach, you're not tracking anything
at all, but you're getting your desired result,
you're dropping body fat consistently, you're
losing inches, your training performance in
the gym is on point, then that's great and
you should just keep doing that.
I'm not saying you can't do it.
More experienced trainees can usually do it.
People who are a bit more on the overweight
side can often do it to some degree, like
I mentioned before, and then there are always
just general exceptions as well.
Some people out there can never track a calorie
in their life, and just stick to a relatively
clean diet and get into their desired shape
that way, especially if their physique goals
are a bit more modest and they aren't necessarily
trying to get that lean or that muscular,
or if they just have really good genetics.
However, for the majority of people, I would
say that tracking your intake, at least in
the beginning stages, is going to significantly
increase your chances for success and maximize
the chances that you'll actually be able to
maintain your goal body fat percentage over
the long term.
It's just a really valuable skill to have
in your overall nutritional toolbox.
Again, the big picture goal for pretty much
anybody should be to eventually transition
into an intuitive eating style, but it's not
something that most people can do overnight
and it's a skill that you learn with time.
You have to learn how to operate in this much
more tempting high calorie environment that
we live in now, and keeping track of your
calorie intake and your approximate macronutrient
intake over a sustained period is the best
way for you to go ahead and do that.
And in terms of specific tracking, I don't
think it's necessary to track every single
gram of protein, carbs and fat that goes into
your mouth.
So you don't need to track exact macros, but
I think a good middle ground approach is to
track your total calories, and then just roughly
estimate your macros to ensure that you're
getting in enough total protein and fat, and
that things are reasonably balanced overall.
And as far, as specific numbers go, a calorie
deficit of about 300 to 500 calories below
maintenance.
That's a good sweet spot for most people,
that will have you dropping body fat at a
significant rate, but while also keeping hunger
and energy levels under control.
And then, you'd want to aim for about 0.8
grams of protein per pound of body weight
daily as a minimum, and about 25% of your
total calories from fat as a minimum.
Okay.
There's no perfect macro breakdown, but those
figures will work really well for most people
in most situations.
If you did find this advice helpful and you
want to learn exactly how to bring this all
together in terms of a fully structured step-by-step
program so that you can lose fat and gain
muscle as efficiently as possible, then make
sure to take my physique quiz over at quiz.SeanNal.com
because that'll get you started with, not
just the proper nutrition plan, but also the
proper training plan for you based on your
specific goals, body type and experience level.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box below.
On the supplementation side of things, you
can also visit RealScienceAthletics.com to
check out my no BS science-based formulas
to help fully streamline your program and
get the very best results possible, the link
for that is also in the description.
And as always, make sure to hit that like
button, leave a comment down below, and subscribe
if you haven't already, in order to stay in
the loop on all of my latest content.
Thanks for watching guys and I'll see you
in the next video.