Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj of EliteImpactLabs.com
here and today I want to talk about the concept
of hardgainers and hardgainer workouts.
So the term hardgainer typically refers to
those with a fast metabolism, a smaller bone
structure and who generally have a tougher
time packing on muscle size and strength.
Browse the online forums and facebook pages
and you'll see these quote unquote "hardgainers"
seeking out specific advice for their situation.
What is the best hardgainer workout routine?
I'm a hardgainer and I need a good meal plan
and what supplements are recommended for hardgainers
etcetera.
Now my advice here would be to drop your "hardgainer"
label altogether.
Yes, there's no question that genetics do
play a large role in determining how slowly
or how quickly sombody can build muscle and
yes, it is true that some lifters will require
more time and patience in order to build the
physique that they're after.
But whether you're a naturally gifted bodybuilder
with elite genetics or you're starting off
on the complete opposite side of the spectrum,
the same basic muscle building principles
are still going to apply.
You need to train hard in the gym using correct
form and focus on progressive overload by
adding more weight to the bar over time.
You need to create a proper calorie surplus
each day that involves high quality sources
of protein, minimally refined carbs and healthy
fats.
You need to understand which supplements will
help to accelerate your progress and which
ones to avoid.
You need to track your progress.
You need to remain focused, remain motivated,
and stay consistent to your program over time.
Calling yourself a "hardgainer" and seeking
out a specific hardgainer workout or meal
plan or supplement approach is not only totally
unnecessary but it also backs you into a corner
and leaves you with the false background feeling
that gaining muscle is going to be next to
impossible for you.
Sure, you may not have been particularly blessed
in the department of muscle building genetics,
but so what?
How does paying attention to that fact do
anything at all to move you forward towards
achieving your goals?
As with anything in life, you need to put
your focus on the things that you can control
and forget about the things that you can't
control.
Pre-occupying yourself with your genetic makeup
is a complete waste of time because absolutely
anyone can achieve a strong, impressive, muscular
body if they truly want to.
The only difference is that for some people
the process may be longer or shorter.
And whether you have "good genetics" or "bad
genetics", so to speak, the overall structure
of your bodybuilding approach is essentially
going to be the same.
There really are only two primary factors
to pay attention to in terms of structuring
a muscle building approach that is tailored
to your specific body type.
The first is going to be your overall calorie
intake.
So in order to build muscle, you have to create
a calorie surplus by consuming more calories
than you burn each day and this is accomplished
by finding your calorie maintenance level
and then increasing it by about 15 to 20 percent.
And you can use our automated macronutrient
calculator over on EliteImpactLabs.com to
determine this for yourself and I'll link
that in the description box below.
As a general statement, those who are naturally
skinny and refer to themselves as "hardgainers"
may tend to burn through energy at a faster
rate and will tend to have higher caloric
needs for building muscle.
However, even this is a general statement
and will not apply to every person in every
situation.
And the second is going to be your ability
to recover from exercise.
The basic goal when structuring a workout
plan that is ideal for you is to train as
often as possible while still fully recovering
in between sessions.
The more workout sessions you can perform
and recover from, the more muscle building
"growth periods" you're going to create and
the more overall mass you're going to gain.
Those carrying the "hardgainer" label may
also tend to be those with less than average
recovery ability.
As a result, they may need slightly less volume
per workout and slightly lower overall training
frequency in order to optimize their gains.
However, this will also vary between individuals
and is something that each lifter has to experiment
with on their own.
So, the bottom line here is that if you're
consistently coming back to the gym stronger
over time and you don't feel overly run down
or fatigued, then the overall workload that
you're using is within an acceptable range.
And for most people this will involve 3 to
5 total workouts per week hitting each muscle
directly 1 to 2 times per week.
So just find your individual calorie, protein,
carb and fat needs, structure a workout plan
that allows you to properly recover and make
consistent strength gains over time, and simply
move forward from there.
Forget about the idea of being a hardgainer
altogether because it really doesn't help
you in any real way.
So thanks for watching this video lesson.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your YouTube discount
code in the description box below which you
can use on all of our premium quality health,
fitness and bodybuilding supplements over
on EliteImpactLabs.com and make sure to join
the Elite Impact Labs Facebook page for daily
articles, videos, tips and weekly supplement
giveaways.
Thanks for watching this video lesson and
I'll talk to you again soon with more free
tips.