Hey, man.
You want to build some muscle?
You do?
That’s good, man.
Hey, what’s up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here www.SeanNal.com – www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
I’m going to be doing one more supplement
review here and then get back to my regular
training and nutrition topics.
But a few people out there requested this
one and I really wanted to do it.
Because these supplements come from one of
the biggest fitness channels on YouTube with
a huge outreach, a lot of influence.
But again, I couldn’t really find any accurate
objective reviews of them.
So I’ve figured I’d post one up here for
those who just want the unbiased facts.
So the supplements being reviewed here are
CreaGains and PreGains, and they were created
by the Hodgetwins of TwinsMuscleWorkout, which
I’m sure a lot of you guys are familiar
with.
Before I go further here, keep in mind guys
that these reviews are put up with good intentions.
With the goal being to give up honest information
to help the people out there make better decisions.
And it has nothing at all to do with hating
on anybody or trying to put anybody down.
People are searching for information on this
topic and I’m just providing that information
that they’re looking for.
If there’s anything that I say in this video
that you think factually incorrect, then please
free to post in the comments below.
Because I do read and respond to pretty all
of the questions that I get.
So the first supplement here is CreaGains.
CreaGains is actually a very simple product.
All it really is, is flavored Creatine Monohydrate.
Now creatine is a great supplements.
It’s easily the most effective natural muscle
building compound out there.
I do use it.
I do recommend it.
So there’s nothing wrong with the CreaGains
products itself.
The big issue here is just the cost.
You’re getting four grams of creatine per
serving and sixty servings per bottle.
Which is going to work out to 240 grams of
creatine per bottle for $33.
So without the shipping cost coming into play,
you’re paying about 14 cents per gram of
creatine and that works out to being about
five to seven times higher than what you would
pay for a typical pure Creatine Monohydrate
product.
Now CreaGains is flavored, so you are paying
a bit of a premium for that.
But keep in mind that creatine itself is completely
tasteless and you can easily mix it with anything
you want.
Whether that’s juice, water, coffee, a pre-workout,
a protein shake.
It’s really not hard to just add a small
teaspoon of creatine to one of your drinks
at some point during the day.
So paying five to seven times the cost just
for some added flavoring doesn’t really
makes sense in my opinion.
Now if in buying this you just want to support
the Hodgetwins, you’re aware of the points
that I’m making.
That’s totally fine, but keep in mind that
you can also just get pure 100% CreaPure Creatine
Monohydrate for about two to three cents per
gram at most supplements stores.
For example on bodybuilding.com you can get
a 2,000 grams of CreaPure from Optimum Nutrition
for forty bucks.
That’s going to last you over a year and
you’re going to pay less than two cents
per gram.
And I’ll link that in the description box
below.
If you do want to check it out because that’s
what I used personally.
And the second supplement is the PreGains
Pre-workout.
Which honestly after looking at the label
here, I was kind of a bit confused at the
ingredients that are included, and the dosages.
Because the formula here is kind of bizarre,
for lack of a better word.
The PreGains Pre-workout is based off of a
proprietary blend, which as I mention in my
last video and as I’ve talked about before,
means that you really have no way of knowing
what’s actually in it.
You get the total volume per scoop and you
get the ingredient list, but you don’t get
the actual individual dosage per ingredient.
Now the reasons why the companies do this,
in most cases, is so that they can go ahead
and list a bunch of ingredients on the label.
But then under-dose them and most people weren’t
really know.
And that’s just the way to reduce production
cost.
But if you do understand the proper dosage
for the ingredients then you can just look
at the total volume per scoop and you can
usually get a pretty good idea of what’s
going on in there.
So in the case of PreGains, the size of the
blend is 1.8 grams and the first ingredient
is Beta Alanine.
Now not withstanding the fact that Beta Alanine
itself isn’t even really a pre-workout ingredient
to begin with.
Because it doesn’t have any immediate effects
on performance.
The typical research study dose, falls between
3.2 to 6.4 grams.
So with a 1.8 grams total serving size it’s
literally impossible that you could be getting
enough.
And that’s 1.8 grams for all of the ingredients
included and not just the Beta Alanine.
But moving on to second ingredient is Caffeine
at 275 milligrams, there’s really nothing
wrong with that, for a pre-workout that’s
pretty standard but Caffeine itself is dirt
cheap, and you can really buy it separately
for literally pennies per servings.
So the Caffeine itself isn’t really adding
any significant value here.
And then after the Caffeine, the third ingredient
is Agmatine Sulfate and since the ingredients
in the proprietary blend have to be listed
in order of potency, you know right there
that you’re getting less than 275 milligrams
of the Agmatine because it’s listed after
the Caffeine.
So aside from the fact that Agmatine is already,
sort of, a gray area ingredient to begin with
because it’s really not research proven.
The proper dose is still going to be minimum
half a gram for bodybuilding purposes.
And usually somewhere between 1 to 1.5 grams.
So just based off of the total scoop volume
and those first there ingredients alone, you
can pretty clearly see that PreGains is a
fairly significantly under-dose product.
And again the most prominent ingredient is
Beta Alanine which isn’t even really a pre-workout
ingredient to begin with.
On top of that you can’t just take an extra
scoop of PreGains to get a higher dose, because
if you did that then the Caffeine content
would become dangerously high for you.
And the cost per serving will shoot way up.
So honestly there’s really not much more
to say on that.
For people out there who are going to say,
“Why don’t you go ahead and use the product
and see it for yourself?”.
There’s honestly no point doing that because
as long as pre-workout formula has that standard
Caffeine dose in there, you’re always going
to get that strength and energy boost no matter
what.
And the feeling that you get with pre-workout
is so subjective.
It can be different each time, even depending
on your mood, your diet or how well you slept.
So there’s really no way to decipher which
ingredients are working and which ones aren’t.
As long as that Caffeine is in there it will
basically make up for the rest of the formula
even if there’s nothing else useful included.
We can objectively look at the scoop size.
We can look at the ingredients included and
we can know right there that it’s not properly
dosed.
Given that it just doesn’t make sense to
purchase it in my opinion, because there are
a lot of other superior options out there.
Now again if you understand the points I’m
making, and you want to support the Hodgetwins
anyway by buying this, that’s completely
your choice.
And I don’t see any problem with that.
But just keep in mind that you can also make
your own homemade blend that it’s going
to be a lot cheaper.
It’s going to be way more effective and
I’ll link the previous video that I did
on that, in the description box below if you
want to check it out.
But guys keep in mind that this is all just
advice and you can do whatever the fuck you
want to do.