What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com.
And in today’s video I’m going to be outlining
twenty different mistakes that you might potentially
be making with your fat loss diet that are
either slowing down your results or that are
preventing you from getting any real results
at all.
Now, I usually like to be really thorough
when I explain things, as a lot of you guys
know, but this video is going to be a bit
different.
There are twenty different points here, so
I’m just going to go through each one really
quickly and just give a generalize overview
of each one and I’ll try my best to keep
it concise.
So, here we go: Twenty cutting diet mistakes
to avoid.
So mistake number one: Your daily calorie
intake is set too high.
This is the most basic, most foundational
fat loss mistakes you can make.
If you want to lose fat consistently then
you need to maintain a calorie deficit overtime
by burning more calories than you consume.
And if your calorie is set too high then nothing
else in your program is really going to make
any difference.
A good guideline for most people is to start
out by eating five hundred calories below
their maintenance level.
And that’s going to create the calorie deficit
you need to stimulate fat loss.
Calorie is absolutely do matter and your total
net energy balance in the big picture is by
far the most important fat loss principal
there is.
Mistake number two: You’re over-eating without
realizing it.
So maybe your daily calorie target is set
at the proper level but you’re actually
going over it without intending to.
Now this can happen for a lot of reasons:
Maybe you’re making errors with your food
measurements, maybe you’re going overboard
on cheat meals in cheat days.
It could be little snacks and other hidden
items that are sneaking in into your diet
and aren’t being accounted for.
Or it could just be that you’re not really
tracking your diet accurately in the first
place and you’re just trying to eyeball
things but you’re not doing it properly.
Cutting diet mistake number three: Your calorie
intake is set too low.
So this is the opposite of the first two mistakes
and it happens when people try to rush the
fat burning process, and they crashed diet
because they’re trying to drop the fat as
quickly as possible.
Aggressive calorie deficits can work for some
people in the short term if it’s done correctly
but for the average person going too low is
rarely a good idea because your appetite will
go through the roof.
You won’t feel good physically and mentally.
You’re training performance will suffer.
And you’ll probably eventually quit and
then rebound in the other direction.
Again, the five hundred calories below maintenance
is what I would suggest in most cases.
Mistake number four: You aren’t eating enough
protein.
Not only is protein critical for maintaining
lean mass during a cut or possibly even building
lean mass under the right circumstances, but
it’s also the most filling of the three
major macro nutrients.
So it’s really important that you’re enough
protein each day in order to keep your appetite
under control.
And my general recommendation for most people
is to go with anywhere between 0.8 to one
gram of protein per pound of body weight daily.
Mistake number five: You aren’t eating enough
fat.
So a lot people will make the mistake of thinking
that eating fat makes you fat.
And so they’ll drop their fat intake really
low, thinking that that’s helping them get
leaner.
When really, all it’s going to do is crush
your testosterone levels, negatively affect
brain function, decrease your mood, and it
can also lead to increases in depression and
anxiety levels in some people as well.
So my suggestion is to get around twenty-five
percent of your total daily calories from
fat and I wouldn’t recommend going below
twenty percent as a minimum.
Dietary fat does not make you fat.
Excessive total calorie is what makes you
fat.
Mistake number six: The other possibility,
you aren’t eating enough carbs.
So maybe you are getting enough protein and
you are getting enough fat, but you’ve gone
ahead and cut your carbohydrate intake way
down instead.
Now, low carb diets can work for certain people
depending on their body type and depending
on the situation, but unless you have specific
reasons for doing it I wouldn’t recommend
just aimlessly cutting up carbs.
Because all that’s usually going to do is
cause your appetite to go up.
It’s going to decrease your training performance,
and just like with low-fat diet, it’s also
going to impair your mood and mental functioning.
So at least there’s a starting point for
your cutting diet, just go with 0.8 to one
gram of protein per pound of body weight per
day, get twenty-five percent of your total
calories from fat and then fill in all of
the remaining calories with carbohydrates.
Cutting diet mistake number seven: Your daily
meal frequency is not suited to your appetite.
So everyone’s going to be a bit different
when it comes to meal frequency and everyone
will feel physically better and be more likely
to stick to their diet based on different
patterns of eating.
So given the fact that meal frequency itself
isn’t going to impact your actual bottom
line fat burning fat burning results as long
as the total calories for the day remain the
same, rather than just blindly following some
set-in-stone diet plan you’ll be best off
to take the time and experiment a bit and
then lay out your fat loss diet in whatever
way feels best for you, in terms of meal size
and meal spacing.
So maybe that means six small meals a day,
maybe it means two big meals, maybe it means
four medium size meals somewhere in the middle.
Just figure out where your overall calorie
and macronutrient needs are and then distribute
them throughout the day in the ways that you’ll
be most likely to stick to over the long term.
Mistake number eight: Your daily food choices
aren’t suited to your personal preferences.
So keep in mind that there’s no such thing
as any single mandatory ‘fat burning food’
like you might’ve read in some articles
online.
So if you’re not crazy about a particular
food item, then there’s no need to force
yourself to eat it.
It’s perfectly possible to lose fat and
build muscle and enjoying your meal at the
same time, as long as you take the time to
lay things out and to prepare.
So just go through the foods in each category.
Protein, carbs, and fats, and then just choose
the ones that you like best, whether it’s
chicken versus fish, rice versus potatoes,
bananas versus apples, oatmeal versus bread,
et cetera.
As long as the bulk of your diet is based
around minimally process whole foods then
it’s mainly just a numbers game from there.
And you can use whichever foods you’d like
to hit your daily macronutrient targets.
Mistake number nine: Your calorie to food
volume ratio is out of balance.
So the bottom line is that if you’re trying
to lose fat then you need to maintain a calorie
deficit, and if you’re in a calorie deficit
then you will feel a certain degree of hunger
in different points in the day.
So, one of a key ways to offset that is by
consuming foods that are low in calorie content
relative to their volume.
So if you’re loading up on things like dried
fruit or peanut butter, health bars, calorie-dense
snack and smoothies and things like that,
you’re going to be getting a lot of calories
in exchange for only a small amount of actual
food.
Whereas if you based your diet around less
calorie-dense foods like fruits, vegetables,
lean proteins, whole grains, et cetera, you’re
going to be able to eat a lot more actual
food and fill yourself up while still keeping
your calories under control.
Mistake number ten: You’re forcing yourself
to ‘eat clean’ 24/7.
So yes, the majority of your cutting diet
should be based around nutrient-dense, minimally
process whole foods but that doesn’t mean
you have to eat plain chicken breast and rice
and broccoli all day long.
It doesn’t mean that ‘clean foods’ are
the only thing you’re allowed to eat.
As long as your fat loss plan is mainly based
around what you traditionally refer to as
‘clean foods’ then you can go ahead and
fill in about ten to twenty percent of your
overall calories with your favorite treat
foods, as long as you tracked them as part
of your overall intake.
Doing this is not going to negatively impact
your overall fat burning results but it will
make your diet more enjoyable and it will
prevent you from feeling deprived and overly
restricted, which is then going to increase
the chances that you’ll actually stick to
your cutting diet over the long term.
Mistake number eleven: You’re going overboard
on cheat meals and cheat days.
So this one here would be the opposite of
the last mistake where people think that,
you know, they’re eating clean and hit their
calories over a certain period, so it’s
now okay to just go all out and eat whatever
they want without any worries.
Now this approach can be fine for some people.
If it’s just for a certain meal or if they
don’t go too crazy with it, but for those
who take it too far and who are doing it too
often this can very easily add up and can
hugely offset the deficit that you created
over the previous period.
Remember that fat loss is ultimately a game
of your total energy intake versus your total
energy expenditure in the overall picture.
And while cheat meals are totally fine to
have, they aren’t, somehow, free calories
and everything that you’re eating accounts
toward your total calorie intake for the day
and for the week.
Mistake number twelve: You’re following
extreme, overly restrictive dietary rules.
So any fat diet approach that heavily restricts
certain macronutrients or eliminates entire
food groups or the overly emphasized smaller
details like meal frequency and meal timing,
eating highly specific foods at certain times
of day and avoiding other foods at certain
times of day.
These types of diet might work put okay in
a short term but they usually won’t be sustainable
over the long term.
Fat loss is ultimately pretty simple and there’s
no need to unnecessarily overcomplicate your
eating plan, and doing so is probably just
going to increase the chances that you’ll
eventually get burn out and quit.
Mistake number thirteen: You aren’t adjusting
your calorie intake as you get leaner.
So the calorie intake that you start your
cut out isn’t necessarily going to be the
calorie intake that you end your cut at.
And if you find that your fat loss is plateauing
then you may need to adjust your calories
downward in order to continue getting leaner.
So if your results have clearly stalled out
for about a one to two week period then you
can either add a bit more cardio to your plan
depending on how your program is already structured,
or you can decrease your daily intake by about
a hundred to a hundred and fifty calories.
Mistake number fourteen: You aren’t taking
any refeed dates.
Refeeds aren’t going to be necessary in
the earlier stages of a cutting diet, especially
for those who are more overweight to begin
with, but as you get leaner and leaner depending
on how far you’re trying to drop your body
fat, a weekly refeed day can be a good tool
to give you a nice physical and mental boost
and to take a short break from your diets,
with the main goal being to improve overall
long term adherence.
Refeeds are pretty simple, just take one day
a week where you eat at your calorie maintenance
level and get the majority of the increase
form carbohydrates.
Mistake number fifteen: You aren’t drinking
enough water.
A smaller point here but staying properly
hydrated is going to help to control your
appetite further.
You’ll feel better physically and mentally,
and it will improve your training performance
as well.
So I wouldn’t suggest overlooking this.
I don’t have a set guidelines here because
it’s varies quite a bit depending on the
person, but a good approach is to just drink
enough water so that you are peeing relatively
clearly throughout most of the day.
Cutting diet mistakes number sixteen: You’re
putting too much emphasis on supplements.
So keep in mind that any fat burning supplements
that you might be using are only going to
have a very minor impact on your results at
best, and the overwhelming majority of your
progress is going to be decided by proper
training and proper nutrition.
So don’t make a mistake of thinking that
supplements can somehow make up for poor eating
habits.
And don’t put too much stock in them because
you’re basically looking at a few percent
of extra results over the long term by including
supplements in your plan.
Mistake number seventeen: You aren’t getting
adequate sleep each night.
Now, this isn’t a direct dietary mistake,
but I figured that I’d include it here anyway
because improper sleep definitely can throw
your eating plan off track by increasing your
appetite.
And it does that by decreasing your levels
of leptin and increasing levels of ghrelin
which are two really important hormones that
regulate your hunger levels.
So if you want to maximize the chance that
you’ll actually stick to your cutting diet
over the long term then you’ll want to make
sure that you’re getting enough quality
sleep each night, so that you’re feeling
fully rested in the morning.
Not to mention all the basic health benefits
of proper sleep, as well as the effect that
it will have on your training performance
and your mental state as well.
Mistake number eighteen: You aren’t being
patient enough.
If you really want to get lean and significantly
transform your body, then the process takes
time and patience, there’s no way around
it.
And one of the best ways to lose motivation
to fall off track is by expecting too much
too soon.
A standard rate of fat loss for most people
is going to be around one to two pounds per
week, maybe slightly more for those that are
significantly overweight, but you’re not
going to happen to find six-pack overnight
and you have to be willing to trust the process
and just put in the work week after week after
week if you really want to succeed long term.
It’s a game of consistent singles rather
than homeruns and maintaining proper patience
is absolutely the key.
Mistake number nineteen: You’re comparing
yourself to the wrong people.
Now, this sort of ties in with the last point,
but keep in mind that those perfect physique
that you’ve seen in magazines or on social
media, those represent the absolute best of
the best in terms of genetics.
And a lot of those people are actually using
drugs and aren’t even natural athletes to
begin with.
On top of that, the pictures are usually taken
under perfect conditions in terms of lighting
and angles and pumps and oil.
And sometimes they aren’t even truly real
to begin with because they’ve been touched
up or even blatantly photoshopped.
So having an ultimate goal in mind for motivational
purpose is fine but it can also have the opposite
effect and it can lead to discouragement and
throw you off track with your diet if you’re
constantly comparing your physique to something
that is very off and pretty much a fantasy.
So if you’re going to compare yourself,
and we all do it to a degree, then at least,
be realistic and make sure to do it with the
general everyday population as a whole as
well.
Because even just being somewhere around,
say twelve percent body fat, give or take,
with some modest muscular development, that
already puts you in better shape than the
vast, vast majority of people out there.
And finally, cutting diet mistake number twenty:
You’re expecting things to go perfectly.
So regardless of how carefully you’ve planned
things out or discipline you might be, you’re
still going to have days when things go off
course.
It’s a guarantee.
You’re going to go over on your calorie
sometimes, and you’re going to give in to
temptation sometimes, you’re going to feel
different highs and lows in your motivation.
That’s all part of the process.
It’s completely normal.
And if you’re expecting things to go perfectly
smooth all the way through or you think that
making a mistake here and there means that
there’s something with you personally then
when those bumps in the road do show up, and
they will, you’re going to be far more likely
to get overly discouraged and have a hard
time getting back on track.
Always remember that fat loss is all about
what you do in the big picture.
Your progress is not going to be perfectly
linear no matter who you are.
You will make mistakes.
And you have to learn to just be able to brushed
them off and to continue on with your plan
regardless.
So there you go guys, twenty different cutting
diet mistakes.
I hope you found this useful.
If you do want to get a complete step-by-step
road map in terms of training, nutrition,
supplements, for losing fats while also showing
you how to customize that plan to your exact
needs, then you can check out my complete
Body Transformation Blueprints over at www.BodyTransformationTruth.com,
or by clicking here.
The link is also in the description box.
If you found this tips helpful, make sure
to share the video, like, comment and subscribe.
You can also follow me social media here if
you aren’t already.
And the official blog is over at www.SeanNal.com.
Thanks for watching, guy.
And I will see you in the next video.