When it comes to amino acid supplementation
in general, BCAAs have been the top choice
for most lifters for many years now.
There's still a top selling supplement and
a lot of people use them pre-workout, intra-workout
or even post-workout as a way to stimulate
protein synthesis and prevent muscle breakdown.
Now I've made quite a few videos about BCAAs
in the past and talked a lot about them on
my blog and my Instagram, basically explaining
that when it all comes down to it, they're
really just a complete waste of money and
that if you just eat enough protein from your
regular diet, which is pretty easy to do at
about 0.8 grams of protein per pound of body
weight daily.
If you do that, you'll already be getting
all the BCAAs that you need and supplementing
with additional BCAAs on top of that isn't
going to give you any extra anabolic or anti-catabolic
effect.
And fortunately the research just keeps piling
up on this.
And I'd say at this point among most what
you'd call I guess, evidence-based fitness
coaches, there's really no debate about BCAAs
at all in the sense that we essentially know
that they literally don't do anything other
than give you a possible placebo effect.
And besides the fact that your regular protein
intake will already be giving you enough BCAAs
as is.
The other reason why they just don't work
is because even though BCAAs do technically
stimulate protein synthesis, you still need
to take in the full spectrum of essential
amino acids along with them in order to actually
carry out the muscle building process.
So taking BCAAs is like calling construction
workers to a site, but then not providing
them with any materials to actually build
anything.
And so because of this, now we're starting
to see more people pushing essential amino
acid supplements, which still provide the
three branch chain amino acids, but also the
additional spectrum of essential amino acids
as well in order to produce a more complete
muscle building effect.
And yes on a head to head basis, an essential
amino acid supplement would be superior to
a pure BCAA supplement, but the same logic
here applies and the same logic holds true
at the end of the day.
If you're just eating enough protein from
your regular diet, your essential amino acid
needs are already going to be fully met and
just dumping more and more on top of it isn't
going to give you any sort of added muscle
building effect.
Your body can only make use of a limited amount
of amino acids each day for the purpose of
gaining muscle and you can't just force additional
growth by going beyond that point.
It's really that simple.
Now the other question is in regards to fasted
training, this is the other main situation
where people commonly use essential amino
acid supplements as a way to prevent muscle
breakdown during the session.
And I do agree that getting in some protein
slash amino acids pre-workout is probably
ideal if you want to fully maximize your gains.
The difference would probably be fairly small,
either way, as long as you're eating enough
total protein for the day as a whole.
But yeah, for 100% optimal muscle growth and
maintenance, completely fasted training probably
isn't going to be ideal.
However, if you're planning to use EAAs for
that purpose, you'll actually be better off
to just use regular protein powder instead.
See, people have this misconception that a
BCAAs or EAAs are zero calorie and they're
basically just free amino acids that you can
add into your diet.
When in reality, all amino acids contain calories
and on a gram for gram basis, they're pretty
much on par with regular dietary protein,
so whether you use BCAAs, EAAs or 20 grams
of whey protein, you're technically no longer
fasted anyway.
Not to mention that there's no special benefit
to training fasted in the first place other
than it just being a matter of personal preference
if you just feel better training that way.
And the reality is that regular protein is
actually going to be superior to an essential
amino acid supplement because it's going to
provide you with the full spectrum of all
of the aminos and their natural ratios.
The big problem that I see with most EAA supplements
is that a lot of them use proprietary blends,
meaning they just lump together all of the
amino acids into one mixture and then they
list the total amount for all of the aminos
combined, but not the specific dosage per
amino acid.
And literally the only real reason supplement
companies use proprietary blends in the first
place is just as a way to cut costs because
that way what they can do is front load the
cheapest amino acids into the blend and include
those ones in higher amounts and then just
sprinkle in whatever amount they want of the
more expensive ones.
The label might list off an amino acid matrix
that's 10 grams in total and then have cheap
amino acids like taurine at the very start
of the list.
And for all you know, there could be eight
grams of taurine in that blend and then just
a tiny amount of all of the other amino acids.
For the most part, if any supplement company
uses a proprietary blend on their label, it's
because they're trying to hide something and
there's something in there that they don't
want you to see otherwise they'd have no real
reason to use one.
And it's just a huge red flag and it's reason
enough to avoid that particular product, in
my opinion.
And then for the amino acid supplements, the
essential amino acid supplements that don't
use proprietary blends, most of them still
seem to prioritize the BCAAs first and foremost,
and then they only include a much smaller
amount of the rest of the essential aminos,
in which case those products should ultimately
be avoided as well.
So at the end of the day, there's just no
good reason to use an essential amino acid
supplement over a standard protein powder
if you're looking to get a more EAAs into
your diet in a convenient way, or if you're
training fasted, which I put in quotes because
again, you're technically not fasted if you
ingest amino acids of any kind prior to training.
So the protein powder, whether it's whey,
egg, a casein, a blend of some kind or even
a good plant-based powder that's going to
give you the full natural spectrum of amino
acids in a convenient liquid form, just like
an EAA supplement.
And on top of that it's going to be more cost
effective on a gram for gram basis as well.
You are going to get a tiny bit of extra carbs
and fats from the protein powder, but the
amounts in there are going to be so small
that they really aren't going to matter in
the overall scheme.
And if you are that paranoid about a couple
grams of carbs or a gram or two of fat here
and there and you really want to fully minimize
it for some reason and then you can just purchase
a whey isolet which contains almost no carbs
or fat and is basically just pure protein.
That's really all there is to it here guys.
BCAAs and EAAs are ultimately both unnecessary
supplements.
You can easily get all the amino acids you
need for optimal gains from your regular diet.
And if you're looking for a convenient way
to get in a higher amount of essential amino
acids, whether it's before your workout or
just in general because maybe your whole food
protein intake is lacking, a little bit of
basic protein powder is going to be your best
bet and a lot of people have been asking me
about it, but at the time of this video, Real
Science Athletics doesn't offer a protein
powder product, but it's definitely something
that we'll be adding in down the line.
For now we have available our pre-workout
formula, athletes multivitamin and fish oil.
And I genuinely believe that these are the
best formulated products in their categories
right now and you can check them out by visiting
us over at realscienceathletics.com using
the link up here or in the description box
below and you can also use coupon code a YOUTUBE10
to save 10% off your entire first order.
Thanks for watching guys.
Make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment and subscribe below if you haven't
already in order to stay up to date on future
videos.
And I'll see you in the next one.