Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
EliteImpactLabs.com and today I'm covering
a very important topic which is on the issue
of natural testosterone boosters.
So whether or not they're effective and if
so what the best test booster available is.
So testosterone is the primary male sex hormone
and it plays a very critical role in the muscle
building and fat burning processes.
The higher your levels of testosterone are,
the faster and more efficiently you'll be
able to build muscle, burn fat and transform
your body.
And because of this an entire breed of “testosterone
boosting supplements” have become available,
including tribulus, avena sativa, d-aspartic
acid, long jack and anti-estrogens.
But do any of these supplements actually work?
Well to put it simply, aside from the actual
use of anabolic steroids, no pill or powder
out there is going to naturally raise your
testosterone levels high enough to have any
measurable impact on your muscle growth, your
strength gains or your bottom line fat loss.
It's really as simple as that.
I've mentioned this before but the key thing
to keep in mind with any product that claims
to naturally boost testosterone levels is
that boosting testosterone levels in and of
itself means virtually nothing.
And that’s because in order for it to have
to any significant impact on your ability
to build muscle or burn fat, those levels
of testosterone have to be increased by several
hundred to 1000 plus percent.
There are plenty of compounds out there that
may increase the body’s production of testosterone,
but if we’re talking about a couple percent
here and there, they're really not going to
have any value at all as a bodybuilding aid.
And as of right now, none of the popular test
boosters on the market have ever been demonstrated
in reliable research to produce increases
large enough to enhance muscle growth or fat
loss in any direct measureable way.
The closest that we’ve come is with d-aspartic
acid, which has been consistently shown in
research to produce increases in testosterone
of about 30 percent so if there is any substance
out there that we could call the “best test
booster”, d-aspartic acid would be it.
But even 30 percent is probably not going
to be high enough to positively influence
your body composition or gym performance and
on top of this, the short term and long term
safety of d-aspartic acid has not been confirmed
as of yet.
So do natural testosterone boosters have any
use at all?
Well as potential libido enhancers for guys
in you know the 40 plus age range, maybe,
as a mild energy or mood enhancer, maybe.
But in terms of producing raw increases in
muscle size, strength or fat loss, leave the
test boosters on the shelf and focus your
time, your money, your effort on the things
that really matter which is proper training,
nutrition and supplements that are actually
backed by solid research.
And if you do want to check out some very
high quality science based formulas then you
can check out our product line over in the
Elite Impact Labs store which I will link
in the description box below.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free "28 Day Mass
Building Plan" using the link in the description
box below that includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide which you can
grab over on EliteImpactLabs.com and make
sure to join the Elite Impact Labs Facebook
page for daily articles, videos, tips and
bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video, I appreciate
all the support and I'll talk to you again
soon with more free tips.