What’s up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, www.SeanNal.com and I wanted
to make a video today addressing a really
common mistake that a lot of lifters make.
It’s more common in beginners but even intermediate
lifters do it too.
And that mistake is putting just way too much
emphasis on chest training and thinking that
building bigger pecs is way more important
that it actually is.
When it comes to upper body training horizontal
presses like the barbell-bench press or the
dumbbell press, these are usually treated
as sort of the most valued default exercises
in most people lifting routines.
If you just take a look around any standard
commercial gym it’s pretty easy to see that.
People just think that building a big chest
is the key to an impressive upper body.
And obviously every muscle group plays an
important role in bringing your whole physique
together and a well developed chest is a part
of that, and it is one of the largest muscle
groups on the body, but the reality is that
it actually isn’t that big of a muscle and
it doesn’t play as big of a role as most
people think in giving you that bigger, more
muscular overall appearance.
I talked about this in a video a while back
but in terms of really giving you that stronger
more powerful upper body look your upper back
and shoulders are probably going to contribute
more to that than your pecs will, especially
when you’re wearing a shirt.
The pecs just, kind of, sit on the front of
your body and so they will make you look thicker
from the side view, and obviously having well
defined pec is good when you have your shirt
off but form the front having good traps and
good round shoulders is really going to give
you that wider, more pronounced look that
you probably going for.
So, yeah, obviously training your chest fully
as part of a well rounded program, well developed
pecs look good and they’re still an important
part of an aesthetic physique, but going into
the gym and just doing set after set after
set of bench presses and dumbbell presses
and cable crossovers and machine movement
for the chest, doing all of that just for
this one area is ultimately overkill.
If you’re doing that at the expense of fully
training your back then you’re making a
legitimate training mistake that’s actually
going to detract from your physique.
And that’s the other point that I wanted
to make here, is that it’s not really accurate
to categorize your body by talking about your
chest and then your back as if they’re somehow
equal.
Your chest is basically one muscle, it’s
the pecs major.
There is the pec minor underneath but it’s
a lot smaller and for bodybuilding purposes
you don’t really need to worry about it.
But your back on the other hand, is not one
muscle group.
You have your lats, which are a very large
muscle that originates all the way down towards
your lower back and attach all the way up
on your humerus.
You have the traps which contained quite a
bit of mass.
There’s the spinal erectors which are two
big columns of muscle that run all the way
up and down your back.
And then there’s also some smaller muscles
as well like the rhomboids and the [Indiscernible]
groups.
So to talk about the chest and back as if
they g hand in hand, and to say, “I do ten
sets for chest and I do ten sets for back,”
that’s really not a balanced way of looking
at things and it’s not a balanced way of
training either.
Your upper back alone basically matches your
chest in terms of mass and in terms of overall
importance without even taking you lats and
your other back muscles into account.
You don’t call this whole area your front
and lump your pecs and abs together, so to
think of this as being only your back and
doing an equal amount of work for your pecs
versus your entire back, that really doesn’t
make sense.
When you strip it all down to the basics,
in theory to hit your chest all you really
need is an exercise that uses horizontal abduction
of your humerus, whether it’s a barbell
press or a dumbbell press or even a fly because
the movement of the humerus is basically the
same in either one of those.
And that’s the main function of the pecs,
which is to bring your upper arm across the
front of your body.
But to hit all of the muscles of the back
you’d want to do a vertical pulling movement
of some kind to target the lats, so a pull-up
or a pull-down.
You’re going to want a horizontal puling
movement which will also hit the lats but
midback muscles as well.
So that’s going to be some types of row,
whether it’s a dumbbell row or a barbell
row, or some kind of machine row.
And then you’re going to want to do a shrugging
movement as well to hit your traps.
And then depending on how the rest of your
program is laid out, you could also optionally
do a deadlift or a rack-pull, or a weighted
hyper extension as a way to hit your spinal
erectors and the deadlift or a rack-pull will
obviously train your upper back as well.
But, main point being, there’s a lot more
going on in the back and you need quite a
few more individual movement patterns in order
to fully optimize your gains there.
And of course you also have to take the issue
of injury prevention into account as well
because if you’re consistently placing more
emphasis on your upper body pushing movements
as opposed to upper body pulling movements
then overtime you’re going to develop imbalances
that can easily lead to shoulder injury.
So it’s not just a matter of aesthetic here
but it’s also a matter of maintaining just
overall balanced functionality.
But bottom line here, don’t be the typical
bench press worrier in the gym.
Your pec is still an important muscle group
obviously but they don’t need a ton of different
exercises or a lot of volume in order to be
fully stimulated because they’re not actually
that huge of a muscle group and their basic
function is pretty straightforward.
And because also there’s no reason to put
them up on a pedestal as being this super
important muscle group since the reality is
that other muscle groups like your shoulders
and your back will probably contribute more
your overall upper body appearance.
Now, it’s hard to give exact exercise and
volume recommendations because it really depends
on the individual.
It depends on where you are in your training
and what sort of program you’re on but two
to three chest exercises for the week will
usually be plenty.
You could do more but I think it just get
redundant beyond that point.
And you really don’t need a huge variety
because, again, your pecs aren’t that big
of a muscle and their function is pretty straightforward.
So just pick a couple of basic movements,
include both a pressing exercise and a fly
exercise into the mix.
And I would say to make sure to do at least
one of those exercises at either a flat or
a decline angle to hit the middle and lower
fibers of the pecs.
And then another exercise at an incline angle
to hit the upper fibers.
So for example, you could do a flat press
and an incline fly or an incline press and
a decline fly.
And always do your pressing movements first
when your strength is at its maximum and then
do your fly movements after.
And then in terms of total sets for the week
depending on how training program is set up
and what your intensity level is like as well
as how your recovery ability is, it could
be as few as about to eight total sets.
It can be even less than that depending on
the style of program you’re on, so if you’re
on a higher intensity, lower style volume
of training then you could do less than that.
But for most average trainees, let’s say
about eight sets up to maybe fifteen or so
sets for the week at the most.
These are just ballpark figures but that would
be about right and you most definitely don’t
need to be going into the gym and doing four
sets of four different chest exercises two
or three times a week like a lot of people
do.
That’s just totally unnecessary.
So I hope this video was useful, guys.
If you do want to grab a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you exactly how to maximize
your gains using a well rounded sequence of
lifts that hits all the major muscles and
a balanced way for optimal total body development,
then you can check out my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by visiting
www.BodyTransformationTruth.com, the link
is in the description.
That’s going to lay everything out for you
step-by-step, the workouts, meal plans, supplement
guides and one-on-one coaching.
Make sure to like the video, leave a comment
and subscribe if you enjoyed it.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
And you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.