Hey guys, Sean Nalewanyj here, BodyTransformationTruth.com,
and in this video I’m going to discuss the
concept of clean bulking vs. dirty bulking,
and which one is the superior approach for
your mass gaining program.
Now you’ll hear various definitions of these
two terms depending on who you speak to, but
for the sake of simplicity, here is how we
will define them.
So first off, as you probably already know,
in order for you to gain muscle you must create
a “calorie surplus” by consistently consuming
more calories than you burn each day.
And this provides your body with the extra
energy that is needed in order to synthesize
new muscle tissue.
You can accomplish this by first finding your
calorie maintenance level, and your calorie
maintenance level is the number of calories
that you require each day in order to maintain
your current body weight, and then increasing
that number by a set figure to ensure that
you’re maintaining a calorie surplus over
time to support new muscle growth.
Now “clean bulking” refers to creating
a smaller, more tightly controlled calorie
surplus in order to build muscle at a more
gradual pace, while also minimizing gains
in body fat.
On the other hand, “dirty bulking” refers
to creating a larger, more “flexible”
calorie surplus in order to build muscle at
a faster pace, but with the understanding
that greater gains in body fat will also result.
And although it’s not true in every single
case, those on a “clean bulk” will also
tend to be more deliberate when it comes to
tracking their overall calories and macronutrients,
while those on a “dirty bulk” will tend
to follow a simpler approach of basically
just eating a lot of food in general, without
being as strict about their precise calorie
totals.
So, which is the superior bulking approach,
and why?
Well, when it all comes down to it, there
is no one absolute definitive answer that
is going to apply in every situation to every
person, and a case could be made for either
approach depending on the individual’s goals
and their preferences.
However, in the vast majority of cases, I
would definitely recommend that you aim to
stick more to the side of “clean bulking”
and focus on increasing your overall body
weight at a slower, and a more gradual pace.
And here are 4 key reasons for this.
First off, your body can only build a limited
amount of lean muscle tissue in any given
day no matter what you do.
The primary mistake that most people who follow
a full blown “dirty bulking” approach
make is the idea that if a smaller calorie
surplus builds a certain amount of muscle,
then a larger calorie surplus will automatically
build a greater amount, and it just doesn’t
work that way.
There are set limits on how much lean tissue
your body can ultimately build over a set
period of time, and just aimlessly stuffing
your face with more and more food is not going
to magically speed up the process.
Any excess calories that you consume above
and beyond what your body can use to maximize
its muscle building potential in any given
day, those calories will simply be stored
as body fat.
Secondly, a dirty bulk can potentially throw
your entire program off course if you aren’t
careful with it.
Many guys who start out on the skinnier side
and who simply just want to pack on overall
size will often say that they “don’t really
care about gaining excess fat as long as they
just get bigger”, and I remember saying
the exact same thing myself back when I first
got started.
However, I’ve seen this countless times
before where a naturally thin guy begins training
hard in the gym and then just goes ahead and
eats a ton of food every day without really
tracking anything, and a few short months
into the program he’s shocked and ultimately
pretty unhappy with the total amount of body
fat that he’s gained.
Not only that, but he now has a problem, because
he hasn’t come anywhere close to the level
of muscular development that he desires, but
he’s also carrying around an amount of excess
body fat that he really isn’t comfortable
with.
So he can continue bulking and continue gaining
more muscle, but knows that that is going
to mean an even further increase in body fat,
or he can put the brakes on his entire muscle
building program altogether, and go through
the tedious and annoying process of having
to shift into a cutting phase in order to
burn off the excess fat that he’s gained.
Trust me, this is not a situation that you
want to be in.
Regardless of what you might think right now,
nobody wants to get fat, and the only way
to steer clear of this is to bulk up at a
gradual pace so that body fat gains are kept
at a minimum and so that you can place 100
percent of your focus on making continued
muscle gains.
Third, dieting for fat loss is ultimately
a tedious process, and it almost always ends
up taking longer than you might think in order
to reach your desired level of leanness.
It requires you to track your calories and
your macronutrients with more precision, you're
going to feel hungry and have less energy
than you’re typically used to, it will usually
involve additional cardio sessions that have
to be performed throughout the week, and just
like gaining muscle, fat loss is also a slow
and gradual process as well.
So always keep this in mind any time you're
in a bulking phase: for every 1-2 pounds of
additional body fat that you gain, that’s
roughly one full week of dieting and cardio
that you’re going to have to endure later
on if you want to burn off that excess fat.
And if your goal is to retain as much lean
muscle as possible during your cut (and I
would imagine that that pretty much describes
everybody who's watching this video), then
it's going to be closer to the lower end at
probably around 1 pound of body fat per week.
So, go full on “dirty bulk” mode and gain,
say, an additional 15 pounds of fat, and that
could mean around 4 full months or so of dieting
and cardio later on in order to get yourself
back to a reasonable body fat percentage.
And the fourth point is that you’ll generally
just feel better overall when following a
clean bulking approach.
Stuffing your face with huge amounts of calories
every day and eating when you aren’t even
really hungry, that's a great way to keep
yourself feeling bloated and sluggish throughout
the day, not to mention that if you have decided
that dirty bulking is the best approach for
you, then you’re probably not doing much
in the way of weekly cardio either.
A clean bulking diet that involves a smaller
calorie surplus and a couple of cardio sessions
throughout the week, that's generally just
going to leave you feeling both physically
and psychologically better overall, and this
is obviously a good thing in and of itself,
and not only that, but it will also have positive
implications for your overall muscle building
program as a whole.
So for those 4 reasons, I definitely believe
that most people will be best off to approach
their bulking phase using a slower and more
gradual approach, and to focus on building
muscle size and strength while keeping body
fat gains to a minimum.
Now, how should you structure your clean bulking
diet?
Well, you’ll find various figures thrown
around on this, but I think that a safe and
reliable calorie surplus range to shoot for
is about 15% above your calorie maintenance
level.
This amount is large enough to allow you to
build new muscle at or near your maximum potential,
but it's also small enough that fat gains
will be kept under control.
If you want to be particularly cautious and
do absolutely everything possible to prevent
excess fat gain, then you can start off even
lower than this at maybe 10% or even as low
as 5%, and then gradually taper up until you’re
gaining around half a pound of body weight
per week, which is a good pace for most average
beginners.
And if you want to learn how to calculate
your daily calorie intake as well as your
individual macronutrient breakdown based on
these numbers, then I’ll go ahead and provide
a couple of links down in the description
box to help you out with that.
Now, to close this video out I should mention
that, as I said earlier on, there are always
exceptions and there isn’t one single and
definitive guideline that will apply to every
single person.
So with that in mind, let me quickly make
a case for when a “dirty bulk” would make
sense.
So when it all comes down to it, the main
advantage of a dirty bulk is that it doesn’t
really require you to track your diet with
a significant level of precision.
You can simply eat a lot of food, and eat
often, and know that you’re receiving all
of the protein and the carbohydrates and the
fats that you need in order to max out your
body’s muscle building potential.
So, if the risk of putting on a relatively
high amount of extra body fat is something
that you truly aren't concerned about, and
if the benefit of being able to eat more food
and not have to track your diet very closely,
if that outweighs the hassle of having to
diet for a longer period of time later on,
then a dirty bulk could make sense for you.
And this is going to be especially true for
those individuals with above average muscle
building and fat burning genetics, because
it is true that there are some people out
there who can basically eat whatever they
want, gain muscle at a significant rate, and
not even put on much if any body fat in the
process.
However, this only represents a very small
minority of the population, and most people
who take this sort of approach are probably
not going to get the results that they're
after.
So, in the end it ultimately comes down to
your individual preferences, and you’ll
just have to weigh out the benefits and the
drawbacks of either approach and then just
go ahead and make the decision for yourself.
However, that said, for most people in most
situations, I definitely believe that a clean
bulking diet is going to be the superior approach.
A clean bulk will still take you very close
to your maximum muscle building potential
while at the same time preventing you from
getting excessively fat, reducing the need
for strict fat loss dieting later on, and
leaving you feeling physically and mentally
better overall throughout the process.
So thanks for watching this video lesson,
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you want to get complete step by step instructions
for laying out a highly effective muscle building
diet based on your exact needs along with
concrete daily meal plans that you can simply
print off and follow along with, make sure
to head over to BodyTransformationTruth.com
and grab my complete “Body Transformation
Blueprint” System and you can do that by
clicking the icon at the top of the video
or using the link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
And make sure to check out my official blog
over at SeanNal.com for all of my latest articles,
tips and other updates.
Talk to you again soon.