What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video here I want to outline the
one very common mistake a lot of guys make
when bulking and something that you should
definitely be conscious of, if you’re currently
on a muscle building phase and you’re trying
to maximize muscle growth.
So the mistake is actually really simple but
I see this over and over again, and it’s
something that I did in the past and it’s
something that I can actually still end up
falling into if I’m not careful.
The mistake is re-adjusting your calorie intake
at too quick a pace.
So if you’re in the bulking phase and you’re
focused on gaining muscle then obviously you
need to be eating in a calorie surplus.
And yes, as you gain more and more muscle
your calories have to gradually increase along
with it because your body requires additional
energy to maintain the existing mass you’ve
built as well as build more muscle on top
of it.
But what happens really often is that someone
will start off with the intention of doing
a lean bulking phase and keeping their calorie
surplus tightly controlled to keep fat gains
at the minimum, which is what I always recommend
doing for most people, I think that’s the
smartest route.
But what will happen is that once they get
going with their bulking program and they
start seeing consistent muscle gains they’ll
get really excited, maybe a bit overconfident
and their nutritional discipline will gradually
start to loosen up more and more.
They’ll see those initial gains and then
be tempted to speed up the process and they’ll
start eating a bit more here, a bit more there,
adding in extra foods that they wouldn’t
have otherwise eaten and then just telling
themselves that it’s no big deal because
they’re bulking and they need the extra
calories to keep gaining muscle.
And this happens not only because they’re
trying to keep the gains going but it also
becomes an excuse to just to eat more food
(period).
So maybe they normally wouldn’t have ordered
that cake and ice cream for dessert or they
would’ve stop at three pieces of pizza instead
of six, but because they’re sort of in that
bulking mindset they just end up going for
it anyway.
So it’s actually what starts out as a clean
bulk, gradually turns into a dirty bulk and
of course the end result is that they end
up gaining more body fat than they intended
to.
Always remember that more calories doesn’t
automatically mean gaining more muscle.
Your body can only gain so much muscle any
given day and once you go beyond that limit
of what can actually be used for muscle growth,
all you’re really doing is putting in more
fat at that point.
So if you want to keep fat gains minimize
you have to have the discipline to know what
your daily calorie needs are and then to stick
to them without aimlessly adding more food
on top of it, because all of those extra calories
will add up over the course of a few weeks
and months.
And not only that, but coming back to the
original point, only increase your calories
when it’s actually necessary to do so.
A lot of guys will fall into the trap of thinking
that they need to constantly be bumping up
their calories every single week or every
two weeks in order to keep gaining weight.
But it’s important to understand that calorie
surplus numbers are never going to be a hundred
percent spot on and your body weight is also
going to fluctuate from day-to-day depending
on a whole bunch if different factors.
So my advice would be to only increase your
calories once you can clearly see that your
weight gains has either stalled or significantly
slowed down.
And then from there you can bump up your intake
to keep things moving.
But don’t increase it until you can objectively
see that it’s necessary.
And at that point you can make a small increase,
usually 100-150 calories is a good number
and from there you can reassess to see how
your body weight responds.
But the bottom line is to make sure that you’re
doing all of this in a slow, gradual way if
you want to stay relatively lean throughout
your bulking phase.
Remember that you’re never going to lose
body fat while you’re in a calorie surplus.
And so whatever fat you gain that’s going
to be stuck with you for the entirety of your
bulking phase and it’s not going to go anywhere
until you consciously decide to switch gears
and focused on fat loss.
And if you do end up putting on an amount
of fat that you’re unhappy with, it can
easily de-motivate you and throw your plan
off track.
And not only that but the more fat you gain,
the more time you’re going to have to spend
dieting later on in order to get rid of it.
So, keep your surplus moderate around, you
know, 200 to 300 calories above your maintenance
level.
Track your weight gain and only make adjustments
when your progress clearly starts to stall.
So guys, if you found this advice helpful
and you want to get all the tools you need
to lose fat and gain muscle as effectively
as possible including step-by-step meal plans,
workouts, supplement guides and one-on-one
coaching then you can download my Body Transformation
Blueprint by clicking here or by heading over
to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com using the
link in the description box.
Make sure to follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com and
feel free to like, share, comment and subscribe
to stay up to date on future videos.
Talk to you guys again soon.