Hey, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.SeanNal.com-www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
and in this video here I want to talk a little
bit about “Cheat Days”, and why it’s
something that you need to be very careful
with, because all of cheat days can really
easily throw your fat loss results off track
if you’re too reckless with them.
So I’m sure most of you are familiar with
what a cheat day is.
Usually it’s done once a week where you
stick closely to your diet for six days and
then on one day of the week you’re allowed
to reward yourself by eating your favorite
foods and by eating more of them.
Now, I’m totally in favor of the concept
of flexible dieting and it absolutely is possible
to eat your favorite foods on a pretty consistent
basis and still get very lean, but at the
end of the day fat loss still comes down to
net energy intake versus net energy expenditure.
So in the big picture over the course of a
few days and a few weeks you need to maintain
a calories deficit by burning more calories
than you’re consuming.
The problem with all out cheat days where
calorie intake isn’t accounted for, is that
they can pretty easily erased, or at least
hugely reduce the deficit that you’ve created
during the rest of the week.
So usually a standard deficit for fat loss
would be somewhere around 500 calories below
maintenance, so if you maintain that for six
days then that would be a 3,000 calorie deficit.
Now if you then go ahead and binged on the
seventh day, every calorie that you eat above
your maintenance level is directly counteracting
that 3,000 calorie deficit that you had.
Now everybody has a different appetite and
people do approach cheat days differently
but let’s say you ate 1,500 calories above
maintenance, which is pretty easy to do on
a cheat day, most people probably wouldn’t
have a problem with that, right there you’re
already cutting your total calorie deficit
right in half but for most people who do go
all out on a cheat day and who do have a decent
appetite, eating 4,000 or 5,000 calories really
isn’t unrealistic, that’s maybe a couple
of, you know, high calorie restaurant type
meals, maybe a dessert and then whatever else
you’re eating throughout the day and it
all adds up very quickly, and because you’ve
been in a calorie deficit you’re going to
be craving those high calorie foods a lot
more than normal because your body is hardwired
for survival, it doesn’t care about you
getting lean abs, it just wants to get back
to equilibrium.
On top of that you’ve probably heard trainers
or other experts telling you that cheat days
are actually beneficial and that you can just
go ahead and eat whatever you want because
it’s going to spike your metabolism, and
it’s going to shoot your leptin levels through
the roof which is actually going to make you
lose more fat, this is just totally untrue
but when you hear that it gives you more permission
to just, sort of go crazy with things.
Anyway, for most people if you were to eat
4,000 or 5,000 calories in a day that would
basically undo a high percentage of your total
calorie deficit, in which case you either
going to lose fat way slower than you could
be or you’re not going to lose any fat at
all.
On top of that, like I covered in the recent
video, most people don’t even track their
calorie deficit properly throughout the week
in the first place.
So a pre-high percentage of people who think
that they’re eating, say 500 calories below
maintenance, they’re actually off by quite
a bit and they actually might be eating at
a much smaller deficit, in which case cheat
days are going to be even more dangerous.
In extreme cases some people actually end
up gaining weight even though their goal is
to lose weight.
So what should you do instead, so that you
can enjoy your favorite food and still getting
lean?
My first advice would be, like I’ve mentioned
many times before, is just to forget the idea
of cheat days or cheat meals altogether and
just focus on developing an overall lifestyle
where higher fat and higher sugar foods are
just part of your regular diet but they’re
simply eaten in moderation.
So rather than thinking of it as starving
yourself during the week and eating nothing
but clean foods, and then bingeing once a
week on cheat foods just merge the two together
so that your diet is mostly based on what
you’d call clean foods, you know, high quality
proteins, minimally refined carbs, fruits,
veggies, healthy fats and then once you have
those basis covered allow for a round at 10
to 20% of your calorie intake to come from
whatever foods you want.
They’re not cheat foods, you’re not breaking
the rules, it’s just part of how you eat
because you’re a human being and part of
life is enjoying food.
So you’re getting those higher quality foods
to meet your overall health needs and your
muscle building and fat burning needs, but
you’re also getting the satisfaction of
eating the food that you like the most.
Just remember that calorie is absolutely do
matter and those higher calorie foods have
to fit into your overall calorie intake for
the week if you want to see ongoing fat loss
results.
You can lay this all out based on preference,
if you like being able to eat those higher
calorie foods every single day but in smaller
amounts, then go with that.
Or if you get more satisfaction out of eating
bigger portions but having them less often,
then that’s fine too.
Just make it fit into your overall week and
laid out in the way that you the most.
Aside from that the second thing you can do
is rather than having what you’d call a
“cheat day” once a week instead have a
re-feed days once a week, and that means that
rather than just bingeing and going all out,
and not keeping track of anything you’re
instead just going to eat at your calorie
maintenance levels.
A slight surplus, it’s not a big deal but
it should still be around you maintenance
level nonetheless.
So that will allow for probably an extra 500
calories or so and usually with the re-feed
day you’d get the majority of the increased
from carbohydrates.
That would about an extra 125 grams of carbs,
which is a decent amount, to give you a good
psychological boost, enjoyed some additional
foods and possibly offset some of the typical
dieting side effects that you’ll usually
experience after you’ve been in a deficit
for a while.
Now, if you have been using the approach of
a cheat days and you’re able to exercise
in moderation, and you’re losing fat just
fine then I can’t argue with that obviously
and you can just continue, but if you do find
that you’re going in the cycles of the calorie
deprivation followed by a huge calorie over
consumption and you’re not losing fat, then
just get rid of the idea of cheat days, and
number one; start tracking your calorie intake
with more accuracy and just allow 10 to 20%
of your intake throughout the week to come
from your favorite foods and secondly do a
re-feed day once a week where you eat at your
calorie maintenance level, because that’s
going to give you a break from your diet but
it won’t counteract the calorie deficit
that you worked for during the regular week.
As a last note here, everything that I’m
saying also applies to bulking phases, in
which case excessive cheat days won’t reduce
your actual muscle growth but it’ll just
caused you to put on an excessive amount of
body fat.
Re-feed days don’t apply on bulking phases
because you’re already eating in a daily
surplus.
Guys, if you want to get a complete step-by-step
plan that shows you how to eat and train in
a way that is highly effective but also sustainable,
like I have talked about in this video, then
you can download my Body Transformation Blueprint
by clicking here or by heading to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com
using the link in the description.
If you enjoyed the video, as always makes
sure to hit the like button, leave a comment
and subscribe to stay up to date on future
videos.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.SeanNal.com for all of my latest updates,
and you can follow me on social media here
if you aren’t already.
Thanks for watching and I’ll talk to you
guys again soon.