Hey, what's up guys? Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com
here, with another Muscle in Minutes Q&A where
I answer your bodybuilding and fitness questions
in two minutes or less. So, today's question
comes from Braden. And he wants to know what
the proper protein intake is per day for maximizing
muscle size and strength gains. So, the very
important thing to realize with this question
is that there is such a thing as optimal
bodybuilding nutrition. There is no such thing
as bodybuilding super-nutrition. In other
words, your body can only synthesize a limited
amount of muscle in a given day. And the big
mistake that a lot of beginners make is they
think, well, protein is the primary nutrient
involved in building muscle. So, I'm just
going to cram as much protein down my throat
as possible, and watch the muscle gains pile
on. It really doesn't work that way. There's
a finite limit per day. And any excess of
calories that you consume whether those calories
are coming from protein, carbs, or fat are
simply going to end up on your waistline as
excess body fat. Most people way overestimate
how much protein they really need. For the
vast majority of people, you're not going
to need 300grams plus of protein per day.
A very reliable guideline for protein intake
is to simply consume 1gram of protein per
pound of body weight each day. This is going
to vary a little bit for those that are more
on the overweight side and have a higher body
fat percentage, you can usually get away with
less protein, about 0.8grams or so, because
protein intake is ultimately based on your
lean body mass. And for people that are very
lean and are carrying higher amounts of muscle,
they can generally get away with consuming
a little more protein, maybe around 1.2grams.
But either way, those small amounts probably
aren't going to make a huge difference. Either
way for most people, I would just say, 1gram
of protein per pound of body weight, period.
So, if you weigh 180lbs, aim for 180grams
of protein. Simple as that. And if you are
someone who does their measurements in kilograms,
then, you know, obviously keep in mind that
1kg is equal to 2.2lbs. So, you can just do
the calculation that way. So, that's your
question answered. I hope this information
was useful to you. If you have a question
that you would like answered, just head over
to the Elite Impact Labs Facebook page using
the link in the description box below. You
can post your question on that page. And I'll
either make a video response just like this
one or I'll just answer the question right
there on the page. So, thanks for watching.
If you did find the information helpful, as
always, make sure to hit the like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up to
date on future videos. Also make sure to grab
your free 28-day mass building plan using
the link in the description box, which includes
a free workout plan, meal plan and supplement
guide. And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for free daily articles, videos, tips and
supplement giveaways. Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.