Whats going on, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj here; www.SeanNal.com-www.BodytransformationTruth.com.
And in this video here I’m going to be sharing
with you 20 different low calorie sauces,
condiments and dressings that you can use
to flavor your meals while keeping your macros
in-check.
Even with all the nutritional information
that we have available now there’s still
tons of people out there who think that an
effective muscle building or fat-loss diet
automatically means, you know, plain chicken
breast with brown rice and steamed veggies,
but that’s really not the case.
As long as you make the right choices then
it’s perfectly possible to achieve your
fitness goals while enjoying your food at
the same time.
Now, keep in mind that there’s nothing wrong
with using higher calorie sauces if they fit
in as part of your overall calories for the
day.
So if you’re bulking and you have higher
calorie needs and you’d prefer more calorie
dense sauces because you prefer the taste,
then that’s fine.
But overall, most people, especially if they’re
cutting, they’re not going to want to use
up too many calories on sauces and dressings
because they can really quickly add a lot
of calories to the diet without really filling
you up.
So, I don’t personally use all twenty of
these on regular basis, of course, so I don’t
have them all with me here.
I’m just going to list them up on the screen
here with some quick info on each one.
I’m also going to list the nutritional content
per tablespoon, but keep in mind that they’re
just going to be estimates because it will
vary from brand to brand.
And also be aware of the sodium content if
that is something you’re trying to moderate
and track, because some of these are going
to be quite a bit higher or lower than others.
So, here we go in no particular order: Number
on is salsa.
Definitely one of the best fitness condiments
out there with about 4 calories per tablespoon,
taste great and goes well with a ton of different
foods like eggs, chicken, turkey, wraps, salads
or can just be used as a dipping sauce as
well.
Number two, reduced sugar ketchup.
This one here has 75% less sugar than regular
version but pretty much taste the same as
far as I can tell.
1 gram of carbs per tablespoon and this is
a really good way to flavor your foods and
keep the calories under control.
Number three; sriracha.
This is a Thai chili sauce made form chili
peppers, vinegar, garlic, sugar and salt.
You can use this on a long list of foods,
whether it’s a stirred fry, or omelets,
or pasta, pretty much anything and it adds
some nice flavor and a nice strong spicy kick
as well.
Number four is low sodium soy sauce.
This is great for Asian style dishes, of course.
It’s brewed in exactly the same way as regular
soy sauce except that it has 40% less salt.
Number five is hot sauce.
So if you like your food spicy then this is
a perfect fit.
It’s extremely low in calories, especially
considering that you probably only need a
relatively small amount to get the taste and
the heat that you’re after.
Number six; low calorie salad dressing.
Now, they’re going to be a ton of different
options here, so you can check out your grocery
store to see what they have.
But a good bet is the calorie wise line from
Kraft.
My personal favorite, which I really love,
I’m using it every day right now is their
fat free Italian dressing which tasted really
good and it’s only 1 gram of carbs per tablespoon.
Number seven is natural tomato sauce.
Just find a tomato sauce without any added
sugar and you can use it for the obvious choices
like pasta or lasagna.
You can just mix it in with simple foods like
rice or beans; or you can use it as part of
different meat or vegetables recipes.
Number eight; taco sauce.
This is basically just tomato paste, salt
vinegar and spices.
Obviously it’s good for Mexican style meals
like fajitas or burritos, or thing like that
but it also goes well with pretty much any
basic protein source like chicken or beef.
Number nine is fish sauce.
Just like the name says, this is a salty,
pungent sauce -- I guess you could say, and
it’s made from fermented fish with some
other spices added in.
now, this is the highest sodium option on
the list today, so be aware of that, but because
the flavor is so strong you generally don’t
need to use very much of it.
Number ten is oyster sauce.
So fish sauce is generally pretty watery.
Whereas oysters sauce is thicker and it’s
also lower in sodium as well.
This is a staple in Chinese cooking and you
can add it to meat or vegetables for some
extra flavor.
Number eleven is tzatziki sauce.
This is one of my favorites and it goes well
with meats, rice, potatoes or you can use
it as a dip for things like peat or vegetables.
A lot of people forget about tzatziki but
it’s based off of yoghurt, cucumbers, garlic,
olive oil and salt.
So it’s actually a really good option for
fitness type of diet.
Number twelve is mustard, pretty self explanatory.
This is 5 calories per table spoon on average
and you can add it to sandwiches or wraps,
or you can it as part of homemade salad dressings
and sauces.
Number thirteen is worcestershire sauce.
I always have trouble pronouncing that, someone
can correct me if that’s wrong, but this
one is a fairly complicated mixture of a bunch
of stuff; vinegar, molasses, anchovies and
a few other things.
It’s usually used on beef dishes like steak,
hamburgers, meatloaf, ribs or stew, just to
give a few examples.
Number fourteen is vinegar.
This is about as close to zero calories as
you can get.
You can sprinkle a bit over your veggies,
salad, chicken, fish, or pretty much whatever
else you feel like.
Number fifteen, gravy; most people associate
gravy with high calories because of the type
of meals that it’s usually used on, but
gravy itself is actually pretty reasonable
and only has about 8 calories per table spoon.
So you can add some of this to a piece of
steak, some chicken, fried eggs, lean pork,
vegetable, rice, potatoes, it goes well with
a lot of different things, of course.
Number sixteen, light sour cream.
So, if you go with the lighter version, then
sour cream will work just fine as a condiment
if you’re trying to keep your calories under
control.
You can also go with a fat-free sour cream
and then the calories drop even lower to about
9 calories per tablespoon.
Number seventeen is low carb steak sauce.
Even a regular A1 steak sauce isn’t too
bad.
It’s about 15 calories per table spoon.
You can also switch over to the low-carb version
and you can use it more liberally because
it has about 1/3 the calories.
Number eighteen is green chili sauce.
So, this is a less common one that most people
probably won’t think of but it’s great
for some added spice and flavor to Mexican
style dishes, or just with any basic protein
source like chicken or beef.
Number nineteen, Walden Farms’ products;
the low calorie sauces list wouldn’t be
complete without mentioning Walden Farms.
They have an entire lineup of zero calorie
products like barbeque sauce, pasta sauce,
salad dressings, seafood sauce, dips.
Be aware that some of these do taste a lot
better or worse than others, so I’d suggest
reading some reviews online to find the most
popular ones.
My personal favorite is their chipotle ranch
dressing.
This one taste really good and it goes well,
not only with salads but also just with any
typical meat or carb source.
And number twenty has to be mentioned but
you can just make your own homemade sauce.
If you’re someone who enjoys cooking and
you don’t mind spending some more time in
the kitchen preparing your meals.
So just go ahead and run a Google search for
low calorie sauces or low calorie condiments
and you’ll find literally thousands of different
options that you can choose from; low calorie
teriyaki sauce, pasta sauce, mayonnaise, hummus,
tartar sauce are basically nothing that you
won’t be able to find if you just do some
looking around.
So there you have it, guys; twenty different
low calorie sauces to choose from.
Give some of these a try and let me know what
you think.
And if you have a favorite sauce or condiment
that you use for your meals then make sure
to post in comment below to share it.
So, thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this list was helpful.
If it was then make sure to hit the like button.
Feel free to share the video and make sure
to subscribe.
The official website is www.SeanNal.com.
You can grab my complete Body Transformation
Blueprint which lays out all the tools you
need to gain muscle and lose fat as effectively
as possible; the workouts, the meal plans,
the supplement guides along with one-on-one
coaching.
You can get that by clicking here or by heading
over to www.BodyTransformationTruth.com using
the link in the description box.
And you can also follow me on Facebook, Instagram
and Snapchat here if you aren’t already.
The links for that are also in the description
box.
Thanks again for watching, guys.
I’ll see you in the next video.