Hey Guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of SeanNal.com
and BodyTransformationTruth.com and in this
video I want to discuss optimal bulking cycle
length, and answer the question of how long
you should bluk before you decide to cut.
So regardless of what some of the experts
out there might tell you, it's just not realistic
than an average trainee is going to both build
muscle and lose fat at the same time to any
significant degree.
Both goals have opposing caloric requirements,
and unless you have top level genetics or
some chemical assistance on your side, traditional
cycles of bulking and cutting are still going
to be the most efficient overall path to your
ultimate goals.
So if you're watching this video right now,
then chances are that you've decided to start
out with a bulking phase by placing your focus
on gaining overall muscle size and strength
for the time being, but you might be wondering
how long this specific phase of your program
should last before you decide to shift into
a cutting phase and strip off the excess fat.
Well, the truth is that there really is no
set answer here and it's going to vary greatly
from person to person depending on their specific
situation.
Some trainees may be best off bulking for
6 months before aiming to lose fat while others
can bulk for literally years on end without
ever having to worry about a cutting phase
at all.
The first thing to take into account is how
much muscle you ultimately want to carry.
Some lifters want to be as huge and muscular
as they possibly can, while others want to
have a leaner more athletic build while others
would prefer to be somewhere in between.
So the length of your bulking phase really
depends highly on your own personal goals
and no one can decide that but you.
On top of this, there's really no use in applying
a set time frame to your bulking phase from
the get go because it's not going to be possible
for you to predict exactly how fast you'll
ultimately make gains in the first place.
Your individual rate of muscle growth will
depend on your genetics.
It will depend on how well your program is
structured, as well as how closely you adhere
to your program.
Around half a pound of lean body weight per
week is a reasonable guideline for most average
beginners, but this is still just a rough
estimate.
Not only that but you won't even be able to
predict how those resulting gains are going
to appear on your individual frame once you
make them.
For example, 15 pounds of muscle on a 5 foot
7 frame with short limbs is not going to appear
the same as 15 pounds of muscle on a 6 foot
4 frame with longer limbs.
You'll only know how it looks and whether
or not you're actually satisfied with it once
you get there.
And the second thing for you to take into
account is your body fat percentage.
Anytime you try to gain a significant amount
of muscle you are always going to gain some
fat in the process.
This is just a natural result of remaining
in a calorie surplus over time, and your goal
during a bulking phase is to simply keep those
fat gains to an absolute minimum.
And this is best accomplished by maintaining
only a small well controlled calorie surplus
of around 15 percent above your maintenance
level, by ensuring that you're employing a
properly structured weight training routine,
and by including some additional cardio exercise
in your program to keep fat gains at bay.
Since I usually recommend that you only set
out on a serious bulking phase if your body
fat is somewhere around 12 percent to begin
with, and since you're bulking phase should
be implemented in a careful, gradual way,
having your body fat levels get out of control
during your bulk simply shouldn't occur if
you're doing things properly.
That said, if things do happen to go off course
or if you simply end up with an amount of
body fat that you're really not comfortable
with, that's probably a cue that it's time
for you to shift out of your bulking phase
and into a fat loss phase.
However, you still won't be able to predict
this right from the get go.
So the bottom line here is that your best
bet is to simply take it week by week, carefully
monitor your progress and then simply shift
into fat loss mode when or if it becomes necessary.
To set out from the get go and explicity say
that you're going to bulk for 4 months then
cut for 2 months or that you're going to bulk
for 1 year and then cut for 3 months probably
isn't going to do you any real good as there
are far too many unpredictable factors at
play.
Just continue your bulking phase until you
reach a level of muscular development that
you are happy with or until your body fat
levels reach a level that you aren't comfortable
with and you want to reduce.
Just make sure that you stay in your bulking
phase long enough to truly make some solid,
measurable progress before you decide to cut
because you definitely don't want to be one
of those guys who constantly goes back and
forth between both phases every few weeks
and after a year still hasn't made any real
progress in either direction.
So thanks for watching this video.
I hope you found the information useful here
today.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the LIKE button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date on
future videos.
Also make sure to check out my complete step-by-step
muscle building and fat loss programs over
at BodyTransformationTruth.com.
The link for that is in the description box
below, and make sure to join the Facebook
page for daily tips and updates.
The link for that is also in the description
box.
Talk to you again soon.