Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com, with
the Muscle in Minutes Q&A, where I answer
your bodybuilding and fitness questions in
two minutes or less.
So, today's question comes from Dave.
And he wants to know how to lose man boobs.
Now, that might sound like a funny term, but
it's actually a pretty common phrase that
guys used to refer to excess chest fat.
So, the simple answer here is that in order
to lose chest fat, you have to focus on losing
fat from your entire body as a whole.
You have to keep in mind that spot reduction
is impossible.
In other words, you can't target fat loss
from specific areas of your boy.
You can use weight training to target specific
muscle groups.
But you can't actually specifically target
the fat stores in and around those areas.
So, the only way to lose fat from your chest
is to follow an overall fat loss program that
focuses on reducing your overall body fat
levels.
So, this video is not designed to go over
all of the principles of an effective fat
loss program.
But the overarching principle is that you
need to keep yourself in a calorie deficit
overtime by burning more calories than you
consume.
In terms of diet, you want to find your calorie
maintenance level.
And then, reduce that by about 15% to 20%.
And then, figure out your rough needs for
protein, carbs and fat.
Typically I recommend 1gram of protein per
pound of body weight, about 30% of your calorie
is coming from fat, and the rest coming from
carbs.
And then, you're going to combine that with
a proper weight training and cardio plan.
And as you follow that program overtime, you're
going to lose fat from your entire body.
And you're going to lose fat from your chest.
And get rid of those man boobs or whatever
you want to call them.
So, that's your question answered.
If you have a question that you would like
answered, just head over to the Elite Impact
Lab's Facebook page.
The link for that is in the description box
below.
Like the page, leave your question there,
and I'll either answer the question on the
page or I'll make a video response just like
this one.
If you did find this information useful, please
make sure to comment, like and subscribe.
Also make sure to grab your free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com.
The link for that is also in the description
box below.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook,
where we do free supplement giveaways every
Thursday night.
Thanks again for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon with more
free tips.