What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com.
And I've had a few subscribers asked about
this over the years so I wanted to make a
video on it today.
The question being: have I ever competed in
a fitness competition or would I ever compete
in the future, and why or why not.
If you do enjoy this content, guys, make sure
to hit the subscribe button below to stay
up to date.
And also click the little bell symbol as well
that way you'll be notified any time I upload
a new video.
So, have I ever competed?
The answer is no.
And unless something were to pretty drastically
change in my mindset in the future I really
don't see myself ever competing because I
just personally don't really have any interest
in it.
For me, at this point, I think of fitness
is just being one area of my life among many
different areas.
I've been doing it for a really long time
now.
It's a really important area for sure but
it's basically just seen as a tool that I
use to improve my overall life as a whole.
And it's not my number one main focus, or
something that I really obsess over, or have
any interest in taking to the extreme, or
using it as an outlet for competition.
I basically just do my weight training and
my cardio without thinking too much about
it.
My eating habits are pretty much an ingrained
automatic thing now.
It's not this serious struggle that requires
a ton of time and effort to get down.
It's actually really routine and almost effortless
at this point I would say.
I really do like the feeling of being in decent
shape and being physically strong and fit.
It's something I promote because I think there
are a ton of positive benefits associated
with it.
But again, it's going to the extreme isn't
my goal and it's actually not really my message
here with this channel either.
I think shorter term periods of extreme focus
are fine and even necessary especially in
the beginning just to get that initial momentum
and to ingrain the proper habits.
But as a permanent long term approach I think
aiming to have fitness revolve around your
life rather than having your life revolve
around fitness is usually the path that leads
to just better overall well-being for most
people.
In my past, in my earlier lifting days, I
definitely would classify bodybuilding as
having been an obsession.
It probably was for, like, eight or ten years.
I just wanted to be as big and as strong as
humanly possible and it was my main focus,
and I did a video on that that I'll link in
the description box if you want to check it
out.
So I have gone through that phase and I have
had that mindset before so I do understand
it.
And I have dial it down for professional photos
in the past as well.
Not contest lean but I would say approaching
contest lean and so I do have experience with
that process and how it affects the mind and
body.
And I've also done a lot of research into
how dropping to very low body fat levels can
affect a person both physically and mentally.
Now, keep in mind that I'm not against anyone's
desire to compete.
I'm not saying you shouldn't do it.
Everyone has different motivations, and different
values, and views sees things in their own
way and I totally get that.
But it's also important to really understand
what you're doing before you get into it.
And the fact is that dropping your body fat
percentage down to the levels that you would
need to get to in order to step on stage,
or even dropping your body fat close to that
level, is ultimately pretty extreme when it
all comes down to it.
And it ultimately is really just a form of
controlled starvation.
I mean, that's really what it is.
When you get down to those levels, assuming
you're truly getting into that shredded competitive
shape, you are starving your body pretty intensely.
And that process is damaging.
Not necessarily permanently, though it can
be, but it is damaging to your health at least
in the short term.
Our bodies are evolutionarily programmed to
carry a certain amount of body fat for proper
functioning, and when your body fat drops
down to the level of having a ripped six-pack
and striated glutes that might look impressive
on stage but it's really not a healthy state
overall, and it will produce certain negative
side effects because of that.
So getting down to contests leanness or close
to it, really has nothing to do with what
we would traditionally call health and fitness.
And I don't see why the pursuit of that should
be labeled as a fitness competition.
It's not really a fitness competition, it's
essentially a competition to see who can gain
muscle and then starve themselves to as low
body fat as they can physically and mentally
handle.
That definitely involves a lot of hard work
and discipline, and I'm not discounting that
at all, but someone who is in that state in
that moment is actually in pretty poor health,
which is why it can't be maintained for any
real length of time.
And they're going to be much less fit physically
and less fit and mentally than they would
be if they were at a higher body fat level.
And there's even research showing this, for
example, and keep in mind this is just one
single case study on one competitor but the
numbers are still pretty interesting in terms
of what can happen and I'll link it in the
description box below as well if you want
to check it out, but what it did was track
a twenty-six year old competitive bodybuilder
from six months before his competition to
six months after, where he dropped from about
fifteen percent body fat down to around five
percent.
And it showed testosterone levels dropping
by seventy-five percent, thyroid hormone levels
being cut in half, and cortisol levels roughly
doubling.
Again, this is just one person and the effects
did go back to baseline after the competition,
but that at least gives you an example of
what can potentially happen.
Some people are going to have less severe
negative effects, some people are going to
have more severe effects, but there's really
no question at all that the process of severe
calorie restriction over a prolonged period
is pretty harmful, at least in the short term.
Now, if that sacrifice is worth it to you
and you are an experienced competitor or you're
thinking about competing, you like the challenge
of pushing your body to its limits, you want
to see that finished product, and you are
aware of what you're up against and what it
could do to your health, at least in the short
term, then obviously that's a hundred percent
up to you and you I would never try to say
that you shouldn't do it.
Professional athletes make sacrifices that
might be physically unhealthy in order to
compete at that elite level, or people even
outside of fitness, even in academic pursuits
they might outwork themselves overwork themselves
to unhealthy levels to achieve something great.
The same goes for business.
And so competing could just be viewed in the
same way, and I fully understand that.
I get that for some people that sacrifice
is worth it.
It's a form of competition.
But it's just important to be a aware of what's
actually going on here and to ask yourself
why you're wanting to do it and if it's truly
worth it.
Because I think a lot of people just, sort
of, get influenced by what they see online
or in magazines, the Instagram, even here
on YouTube, where that type of physique is
glorified and so they start to see it as being
normal.
And so they want to get into it without really
realizing what's actually involved.
And again, this whole thing extends beyond
just contest prep and even applies to just
being at any bodyfat level that would be below
a normal healthy range.
Obviously the lower you go the worse the side
effects are going to be, but for the average
guy once you get down to about ten percent
body fat and lower you're likely going to
start seeing side effects simply because it's
just not healthy.
And for women it might be somewhere around
seventeen or eighteen percent.
There are going to be genetic outliers who,
of course, can go lower and they'll function
just fine that way.
But I'm just talking in general here for the
average person.
And I even experienced this myself even when
I just dyed it down for professional photos.
Once you’ve hit that unhealthy body fat
range and you try to keep maintaining it,
everything basically goes downhill, both physically
and mentally.
You end up constantly preoccupied with food,
hungry all the time, always thinking about
your next meal, your performance in the gym
goes down, you feel tired, you feel more lethargic,
your mental sharpness starts to go down.
I had a clear increase in anxiety, actually,
which a lot of people also report, your libido
basically gets destroyed as well, which is
something a lot of people don't even think
about.
I don't regret doing that because it was a
good learning experience and it was interesting
to just sort of push myself and go down to
that lower bodyfat level just to, sort of,
see what would happen.
But, yeah, I really have no desire to do that
again anytime in the near future and competing
would just be on a whole other level.
So I almost definitely can't see myself ever
going there.
For me somewhere around twelve to fourteen
percent bodyfat I think that strikes a good
balance and can be easily maintained on a
permanent basis.
And it's not just the negative effects that
you experienced during the dieting process
itself but also after as well.
The physical stuff like your energy and your
mood and your sex drive, that does wreck hover
but the mental effects can also be tough to
deal with because you get used to being at
that really lean level and you don't want
to lose it.
But at the same time you're basically starving
so all you want to do is binge and go crazy
on food, but then you start gaining weight
really quickly and your abs fade, and so it's
just, kind of, this whole process that, sort
of, messes with your head and it's this just,
sort of, weird mental game.
Not everybody's going to go through that but
if you talk to people who do compete and who
do get to those levels, it is a very common
thing.
And if you've ever seen somebody in contest
shape and then see them a few weeks or months
after the competition where they've basically
been binge eating, it's pretty alarming to
actually see how much weight somebody can
put on in such a short period of time.
And it just goes to show how unnatural it
is to be at that really lean level of body
fat because the body is literally just screaming
out for calories and nutrition in order to
get itself back to a more balanced state.
And even people who are normally extremely
disciplined can totally lose control once
that process is over.
So bottom line, if you have a passion for
competing and you just feel like it's in your
blood to do it, and you know what you're doing,
and why you're doing it, you enjoy the challenge,
it genuinely improves your life, then, obviously
go ahead and do it.
But it's not something that I would recommend
to most people.
It's not something I personally have any interest
in.
And if you are going to do it then at least
do your research first and really get an understanding
of what's involved and how it might affect
your health, not only physically but mentally
as well.
Do your research first before you commit to
it because it is a pretty extreme process
if you're going down to those very low levels
of body fat, and there can be real consequences
if you aren't careful.
So thanks for watching, guys.
Feel free to share your comments on this topic
in the comment section below.
If you enjoyed the video make sure to hit
the like button, leave a comment, and subscribe.
My complete program that promotes a good balanced,
healthy approach to building a great physique
without any starvation or excessive deprivation
involved, including step-by-step workouts,
meal plans, supplement guides, and one-on-one
coaching, then you can check out my body transformation
blueprint by clicking here, or by heading
over to www.BTBluePrint.com.
The link for that is in the description box.
The official website is over at www.SeanNal.com.
Make sure to follow me on Facebook and Instagram
if you aren't already.
The links for that are also in the description
box below.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.