Hey what's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj here of
EliteImpactLabs.com and today I'm responding
to a few requests that I've received to do
a review of Creatine Hydrochloride supplements
and so that's what this video today will be
about.
So, we started off with the original creatine
monohydrate back in around the mid 1990’s,
and since then a huge list of “new and improved”
creatines have been added to that list and
one of the most recent of those forms is creatine
hydrochloride, or creatine HCL for short which
is a form of creatine that is created by attaching
a hydrochloride group to the creatine in order
to create a salt.
And like most of the other “breakthrough”
creatine forms on the market, creatine HCL
is surrounded by a lot of hype and big claims
about its muscle building effectiveness in
comparison to creatine monohydrate.
But is creatine HCL superior to creatine monohydrate?
Well, let’s examine the main claims that
are made about creatine HCL in comparison
to creatine monohydrate and thhen you can
basically just make the decision for yourself.
So the first major claim is that there is
no loading phase required with creatine HCL.
Now this is a totally irrelevant point because
there is no need for you to perform a loading
phase with any form of creatine, whether it’s
creatine monohydrate or creatine hydrochloride.
A loading phase can help you see the results
in a shorter amount of time, 5 days as opposed
to about 20 but a standard 3 to 5 gram per
day dosage of creatine will result in full
creatine saturation of the muscles within
about 2 to 3 weeks.
The second claim is that there is no bloating
with creatine HCL.
Now I've talked about this a hundred times
in the past and I don't even really know where
this idea came from but creatine monohydrate
does not cause “bloating” of any kind.
Creatine does require additional water in
order to be stored in your muscle tissue,
but that water is stored inside of the actual
muscle cell itself and not directly underneath
your skin.
And this is actually one of the primary benefits
of creatine usage because it gives your muscles
a fuller and harder appearance.
So sure, creatine hydrochloride does not cause
bloating, but neither does creatine monohydrate.
The third claim is that creatine HCL will
not give you an upset stomach.
Now creatine monohydrate is the most studied
sports supplement in history, and when used
within the recommended 3 to 5 gram per day
dosage does not produce any unwanted side
effects in terms of upset stomach or GI distress
in otherwise healthy individuals so again,
another irrelevant point.
Claim number 4, you don't have to cycle off
of creatine HCL.
Now I just covered this in a video a couple
of weeks ago and there's no need to cycle
your creatine whether it’s creatine monohydrate
or creatine hydrochloride.
External creatine consumption does not alter
your body’s natural production of creatine
when you stop supplementing with it nor does
cycling reduce the side effects because there
are none.
Nor does it enhance the results any further
when you cycle on and off.
So again, this is just another irrelevant
point that's used to market creatine HCL.
And claim number 5 is that there is no water
retention with creatine HCL.
Now, I just mentioned this a couple of points
ago but increased intracellular water retention
is actually one of the primary benefits of
creatine supplementation.
This is NOT a drawback.
Creatine requires water in order to be stored
in your muscles, and to say that creatine
HCL does not cause water retention is basically
saying that it doesn’t work.
Both creatine hydrochloride and creatine monohydrate
are going to cause intracellular water retention,
and this directly translates to improved muscle
growth and performance at the gym.
So, when it really all comes down to it, there’s
just no good reason to deviate from the monohydrate
form when it comes to creatine supplementation.
2 to 3 weeks of consistent creatine monohydrate
use at the recommended dosage of about 3 to
5 grams per day will result in a near 100
percent saturation of your muscle tissue,
and without any unwanted side effects.
And there’s really nothing more that you
can ask for there.
It’s not that there is necessarily anything
bad about creatine hydrochloride itself, but
why pay 8 to 10 times the cost when you can
achieve the maximum benefits that creatine
has to offer by simply using the monohydrate
form?
One of the primary reasons why creatine HCL
is claimed to be superior to monohydrate is
because it is more water soluble and so it
requires a smaller dosage but on a per serving
basis despite that it still ends up being
a significantly higher price.
And on top of this, creatine HCL is still
a relatively new supplement, and at this point
there really isn’t any concrete research
that directly demonstrates its effects in
comparison to the creatine monohydrate form.
So the bottom line here is that you're free
to use whatever form of creatine you like
and I'm sure when I post this video there's
going to be a few people in the comments section
who are defending creatine HCL and who claim
that they got better results with it but at
the end of the day creatine monohydrate is
the most researched sports supplement ever
released and it has a near 100 percent absorption
rate in the body, no side effects and it's
also the most cost-effective form as well.
So unless new research surfaces which shows
a different form of creatine to be superior
to monohydrate for building muscle or enhancing
gym performance, I think the choice is pretty
much a no-brainer at this time.
So I hope you found the information in this
video lesson useful.
If you do want to check out a very high quality
creatine monohydrate based supplement you
can check out our Muscle Amp formula over
in the EliteImpactLabs.com store which I'll
link in the description box below.
If you did enjoy the video, as always, please
make sure to hit the Like button, leave a
comment and subscribe to stay up to date on
future videos.
Also make sure to grab your free "28 Day Mass
Building Plan" using the link in the description
box as well that includes a free workout plan,
meal plan and supplement guide over on EliteImpactLabs.com
and make sure to join the Elite Impact Labs
Facebook page for daily articles, videos,
tips and bodybuilding supplement giveaways.
Thanks again for watching this video.
I appreciate all of the support and I'll talk
to you again soon with more free tips.