What’s up, guys.
Sean Nalewanyj here at www.seannal.com - www.bodytransformationtruth.com
and today I wanted to answer the question
that I do received pretty often but that I
never addressed in the video which is the
topic of body building stretch marks and how
to get rid of them.
So, stretch marks are basically just a result
of your skin being stretched and expanded,
and that causes the connected fibers to break
down and tear, and you end up with lines across
your skin, which usually start out as dark
red or purple and then it gradually fade to
silver or white color overtime.
Not everybody gets them but a pretty high
percentage of serious lifters will end up
with body building stretch marks to some degree
as they gain more and more muscle.
I personally have them as well, I have them
all over my body actually, on my shoulders,
my biceps, my chests, my lats even on my glutes
and my quads as well.
So, on to the real question here, which is,
is there any way to get rid of stretch marks
or any way to prevent them.
The most common recommendation that you’ll
hear is to use different creams and lotions
on your skins, things like cocoa butter, almond
oil, silicone gel or even olive oil.
There’s a lot of people out there selling
a lot of different products for this, but
the honest truth is that there really is no
good evidence to show that any of these creams
or lotion worked for reducing stretch marks,
at least not to a significant degree.
There is some research showing that actively
massaging certain creams into the area can
have a minor effect, but whether that’s
from the actual cream or from the messaging
is not clear and most studies out there don’t
show any real benefits, so I personally would
not recommend that you go out and spend your
money on this stuff because it’s most likely
not going to do much of anything for you.
Keep in mind that stretch marks are not just
a simple surface issue on top of your skin,
they’re actually happening underneath, in
the middle layer and they’re essentially
scars where the skin is actually torn apart.
So, you just think that rubbing a ream or
a lotion o top of your skin and have them
just disappear, it’s really just not realistic.
Now, if your stretch marks really bother you
and you’re serious about reducing them,
then the only way to treat them in a more
reliable way is through an actual hands on
procedure done with a dermatologist.
So, things like microdermabrasion, laser therapy
or IPL, these are the only methods that have
actual concrete research behind them and showing
real benefits, and that’s basically the
route that you’re going to have to go if
you’re really serious about this.
However, even then keep in mind that depending
on how severe your stretch marks are, even
though its treatment don’t guarantee anything
they can probably reduce the appearance of
your stretch marks but not eliminate them
altogether.
And on top of that they’re usually pretty
expensive, they’re going to require multiple
treatments, so you’re going to need to have
the money, you’re going to need the time
and to really dislike your stretch marks enough
to bother going that route.
I personally don’t think that body building
stretch marks are that big of a deal, I actually
kind of like them in a certain way because
I find they sort of serve as a reminder for
the hard work that I’ve putting over the
years, so I’ve never even bother to try
to get rid of mine.
And also keep in mind the stretch marks do
fade overtime in most cases, so time is going
to be your best treatments for them.
The only final piece of practical advice that
I’d give in terms of stretch mark prevention
is that if you’re bulking, this is just
another reason why I recommend going the clean
bulking route rather than the dirty bulking
route, that just means that you should focus
on maintaining a smaller calorie surplus and
making gradual muscle gains overtime, while
keeping fat gains at a minimum.
I covered this in more detail in the previous
blog post, which I’ll link in the description
box but aside from all the reasons that I
talked about in that post, gaining weight
at an excessive pace where you’re putting
on muscle but also a bunch of fat as well,
that’s also going to increase your chances
for developing stretch marks.
So, when it comes to the issue of body building
stretch marks there’s really not much to
it.
Lotions and creams are probably not going
to do much of anything for you and if you’re
really serious about this and you have the
time and money then just go see a dermatologist.
Aside from that try not to worry about it
because it’s really not a big deal and they
will fade overtime anyway.
So, thanks for watching, guys.
Make sure to like, comment and subscribe if
you find this helpful.
You can get instant access to the Body Transformation
Blueprint where I outline all the steps to
gaining muscle and losing fat effectively
including workouts, meal plans and supplement
guides by clicking here or by heading over
to www.bodytransformationtruth.com using the
link in the description.
You can also check out my official blog over
at www.seannal.com and you can follow me on
social media here if you aren’t already.
Thanks again for watching and I’ll talk
to you guys again soon.