What's up, guys?
Sean Nalewanyj on www.SeanNal.com - www.RealScienceAthletics.com,
and in this video today I want to give you
what I think is the simplest and probably
the most accurate method to calculate maintenance
calories for beginner.
So if you're looking to build muscle with
a focused bulking phase or lose fat with a
cutting phase, then regardless of what anyone
tries to tell you on the nutritional side
of things managing your net energy balance,
so your total calories in versus your total
calories out, is the most important baseline
factor in your entire diet.
And it's the underlying foundation that everything
else gets built upon, your macronutrient breakdown,
your food selection your meal timing, your
supplements all of that comes after you've
figured out how many calories you need to
be consuming per day based on your goal.
And figuring out your calorie maintenance
level, so how many calories you need to consume
per day to maintain your current weight, that's
the very first step in the process so that
you can then add the necessary calorie surplus
on top of it for bulking, or the calorie deficit
needed to stimulate fat loss.
Now, the normal route that most people go
when they're trying to figure out their maintenance
calories is they use a calorie calculator.
There's a bunch of different ones out there,
the Harris-Benedict formula to Katch McArdle
formula, now there's basic body weight multipliers,
and all those methods can have their place
and they can work fine for a lot of people,
especially if you are in within, at least,
a moderate body fat percentage and your activity
level is somewhere around average.
I've used calculators personally and I've
recommended them to others as well to use
as a basic starting point, but the downside
is that depending on the person and depending
on certain factors involved, sometimes they
can be fairly inaccurate.
And that's because, well, for starters differences
in body fat percentage are gonna have an impact
on your resting metabolic rate because the
more lean mass you carry the more calories
you're gonna burn, and calculating your body
fat percentage itself is also really difficult
to do accurately.
And then on top of that the type of lifestyle
that you lead in terms of how active your
job is, or how much you walk per day, that
can easily add up to several hundred or a
thousand calories or more per day in terms
of your total expenditure.
And then also the activity multipliers that
the calculators use are also just rough estimates
as well.
And they're kind of subjective, too, because
different people are gonna have different
ideas in terms of what it means to be lightly
active, or moderately active, or highly active,
and that's going to affect the results even
further.
Now, this other very simple method that I
want to give you is also not perfect, because
no method for calculating calorie maintenance
level is, but assuming your body weight has
been at least somewhat stable over the previous
week or two and it hasn't been significantly
increasing or decreasing, then instead of
using a preset calorie calculator and then
adjusting your food intake to that number
what you want to do is the opposite.
So start with what you're eating right now,
figure out how many calories that represents,
and then use that as your estimated calorie
maintenance figure.
Because if your body weight has been reasonably
consistent and your overall activity level
hasn't been significantly fluctuating from
week to week, then whatever daily amount of
food you're eating right now is what you require
to maintain your current weight.
The maintenance calories are all there right
in front of you and all you need to do is
just go ahead and add them up.
So what you want to do is manually log your
diet for about a week or so, just eat how
you normally would, use a nutrition tracking
app or you can even just log things manually,
make sure to take into account every food,
every snack, and every drink item that goes
into your mouth without skipping over anything,
then find out what the daily average is and
then use that as your estimated calorie maintenance
level.
And then from there either apply your calorie
surplus for bulking or your calorie deficit
for cutting, and then just use that as your
starting point for your bulking or cutting
phase.
Again, this isn't going to be perfect but
if you add things up properly then it's most
likely going to be more accurate than using
a preset calculator.
And you can check out two previous videos
that I did, the links are in the description
box, where I discuss how to track your progress
and how to adjust your calories during your
bulking or cutting phase depending on how
your body weight is changing from week to
week.
Remember that no matter what calorie calculation
method you use, it should always just be treated
as an estimated starting point and you're
still going to need to go ahead and track
your body weight closely and then adjust things
if it's going up too quickly or going down
too slowly.
And just as a final point here as well, if
your body weight has been kind of all over
the place lately, or your food intake is really
inconsistent from day to day, or your activity
level has been significantly fluctuating and
you're really just not sure how to go about
calculating how many calories you have been
eating on average, then in that case, yeah,
using a preset calorie maintenance calculator
is fine.
And a few methods you can use are to either
multiply your body weight in pounds by between
fourteen to sixteen, going with the lower
or higher end depending on how active you
are, or you can use the Harris-Benedict formula,
which I'll link in the description box below
for you to check out, or if you do have a
fairly close idea as to what your current
body fat percentage is then you can use the
Katch-McArdle formula, which I'll also post
down below as well.
So thanks for watching, guys.
I hope this advice was helpful.
If you do want to get a complete step-by-step
roadmap when it comes to all aspects of proper
nutrition for building muscle and losing fat,
along with fully structured training and supplementation
plans as well, then you can grab my complete
Body Transformation Blueprint program by clicking
up at the top of the screen or visiting www.BTNluePrint.com.
For those who are new to the channel my brand
new science-based pre workout fish oil and
multivitamin are also now available over on
www.RealScienceAthletics.com, the link is
in the description box.
And make sure to hit the like button, leave
a comment, and subscribe below if you haven't
already, in order to stay up to date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching, guys.
And I'll see you in the next video.