What's up guys, Sean Nalewanyj, seannale.com,
realscienceathletics.com, and in this video
today we're talking about the real truth behind
achieving 6% body fat.
Before I get started, if you're new to the
channel, and you find this content helpful
today, don't forget to hit that subscribe
button below to stay up to date on future
videos, and also, make sure to follow me over
on Instagram as well, where I post daily tips,
training clips, meals, and other updates that
you'll definitely find helpful.
It's @Sean_Nalewanyj, that's where you'll
find me when I'm not here on YouTube.
The big question, how exactly do you get down
to 6% body fat?
The simple answer is that you don't, because
aside from a very small percentage of genetic
outliers, or drug users, or genetic outliers
who also use drugs, the vast, vast majority
of average natural lifters have no business
trying to get that lean as any sort of long
term condition, and they won't be able to
get that lean without experiencing very significant
side effects.
I know that there are certain YouTubers out
there who make this part of their marketing
approach, and promote this idea of achieving
six or 7% body fat as being some sort of normal
standard that everyone should be able to achieve,
and maintain, and then, if they can't achieve,
and maintain it, then it just means that they
are on the right program.
But, this is actually a pretty dangerous thing
to promote, in my opinion, because it's just
not realistic.
It actually causes harm when you're constantly
putting this idea in people's heads, that
leaner is automatically better, especially
if they're a beginner, and they don't know
any better.
Now, there's always going to be genetic variation
at play, but as a general rule, most guys
on average will probably start running into
negative side effects once they drop below
about 10% body fat.
Okay, some guys can do 9%, some can do 8%,
but in general, about 10% and above is where
you want to be in order to be functioning
optimally, both physically and mentally.
And, even at 10%, if we're talking about a
true 10% body fat, even that is pretty lean
as it is.
In terms of maintaining maximum strength,
and energy levels, probably more like 11 to
12% and above, that's where you'd want to
ideally be.
You might see these pictures online of guys
on Instagram with shredded abs, [inaudible
00:02:11] shoulders, veins popping out everywhere,
who are 7% body fat, and they've got this
big smile on their face, but in reality, they
probably felt like shit when that picture
was taken, and if you ask most people who
get that lean if they're being honest, they'll
probably admit that even though they looked
really impressive, they really didn't feel
good at all at that lower level of body fat,
which isn't surprising, because going down
that low is essentially just a form of controlled
starvation.
It's not health and fitness at that point,
it's literally gaining muscle, and then, starving
yourself as far as you can physically and
mentally tolerate, and it's not just a matter
of being hungry either.
When your body fat goes too low, you'll also
have less energy, less strength, your mood
will go down, you won't be as mentally sharp,
your sex drive will tank from the decrease
testosterone, you'll probably feel more neurotic
about your appearance in general, and then,
in more extreme cases in certain people who
are predisposed to it, there can also be longer
term problems with things like eating disorders,
body image issues, that kind of thing.
Unless you have a very specific reason for
why you're wanting to do it over the shorter
term, maybe you're competing, or you're dieting
for a photo shoot, or something like that,
and you've done the proper research to really
understand what it is that you're getting
into, and how to go about it properly.
I really don't recommend that most people
try to get shredded, and people really need
to stop buying into this 6% body fat hype,
and also, the people promoting this idea should
really reconsider some of their content that
they're putting out, because even though it
might help them sell more programs, it probably
does more harm than good to the overall fitness
community when you're constantly glorifying
that level of leanness as a normal standard.
You can definitely be lean, you can be impressively
lean, and still function really well, you
can be leaner than probably 95% plus of the
population with a visible six pack, and a
great muscle definition and vascularity, but
there's a certain fine line where it crosses
over into just being straight up unhealthy.
About 10% is realistic, and technically all
the way up to 20% body fat is still within
the healthy range for a male.
Where you specifically fall on that spectrum
ultimately just depends on your personal preferences
in terms of how you want to look.
Some guys like that leaner, more aesthetic
look, and are willing to sacrifice some size
for the increased leanness, other guys prefer
the sort of fluffier look, and are happy to
maintain that higher body fat, so they can
just look more powerful and stronger in general,
and then, some guys go somewhere in between.
Again, keep in mind that there will always
be genetic outliers, there're always going
to be guys who can get really lean, and stay
that way without any problems, or who might
have a certain body type where their DEXA
scan shows a body fat percentage that's a
lot lower than normal, even though they might
not look exceptionally lean, because keep
in mind, different body fat percentages can
look visually different depending on the person,
but those are rare exceptions rather than
the rule, and unless someone is specifically
showing you their DEXA scan results, which
also isn't perfectly accurate by the way.
You can still be off by a couple percent,
but without a DEXA scan, any specific body
fat number someone gives you really shouldn't
be trusted, because body fat is notoriously
difficult to accurately measure, and unless
you were able to physically slice your body
up, and measure all the different tissues
individually, there's just no way to get a
perfect reading, and most methods do have
a pretty big margin for error.
Most people way underestimate what their true
percentage actually is.
I see guys online quoting themselves as 8%
when they're probably more like 12%, or guys
who say they're 14% who are literally like
20% body fat.
Just take the numbers people give you with
a grain of salt, because it's always just
a rough estimation, but bottom line here guys,
there's nothing wrong with wanting to have
that lean aesthetic look, and you can definitely
do it with the right approach in place, but
you also have to be realistic about it.
Okay, 6%, 7% even 8% body fat year round is
probably not realistic for most guys.
You you don't need to be that lean, you probably
won't be happy being that lean anyway, and
to find the proper balance between aesthetics
and strength, and general health 10%, and
above in most cases is realistic, and sustainable
if you have the right approach in place.
If you found this advice helpful, and you
want to learn exactly how to lay out a proper
program for yourself to achieve a physique
that is impressively lean, strong and muscular,
but while also using methods that are healthy,
and sustainable over the long term, then make
sure to take my physique quiz over at quiz.seannale.com,
because that will map out the specific step
by step training, and nutrition program you
need to get there as efficiently as possible,
and based on your individual goals body type,
and experience level.
You can click up here for that, or use the
link in the description box.
When it comes to supplementation.
You can also visit realscienceathletics.com
to check out my science based, no BS formulas
that I personally created to help you fully
streamline your plan, and get the very most
bang for your buck.
Link for that is also in the description.
Make sure to hit the like button, leave a
comment, and subscribe below if you haven't
already in order to stay up to date on future
videos.
Thanks for watching guys, and I'll see you
in the next one.