Hey, what's up guys?
Sean Nalewanyj, of EliteImpactLabs.com here.
And in this video, I just want to give you
a very quick and easy way to meet your daily
servings of vegetables for the day.
Now, vegetables are packed with micronutrients.
And they're very high in fiber.
And whether your goal is to build muscle or
burn fat, I would recommend that you aim to
get in a few servings of vegetables every
day.
Now, if you enjoy eating your vegetables,
then that's great, just continue doing so.
If you don't like eating vegetables or if
you're just looking for a quick and easy way
to consume them, the simple solution is to
drink some.
And that might sound kind of gross.
But you'll actually be surprised that when
you mix your vegetables with some fruit, and
you add in some sweetener, it actually tastes
pretty good.
You'll be surprised.
It's usually better than you'd think.
So, I don't have like a set recipe for you
today, because there's a million ways you
could combine different fruits and vegetables
to make a specific shake.
So, I generally just go with whatever is laying
around at the time.
Today, I'm just freestyling it.
I'm going with blueberries, lettuce, broccoli
and a little bit of green peppers.
And I'm going to sweeten it with some berry
pomegranate MiO, that's just like a liquid
0 calorie sweetener that you can buy at any
grocery store.
But you can use whatever sweetener you want.
If you want to use stevia, or splenda or whatever,
that's fine.
You can even mix in protein powder as well.
You can kind of get creative with these recipes.
So, I don't know how this is going to turn
out.
I'm not even sure how big the shake is going
to be, but let's mix it all up, and see what
happens.
So, I've got my water here, I should actually
add some ice cubes as well.
Two seconds.
So, I've got four ice cubes as well.
I'm going to toss in the sweetener.
And then I'm going to toss in all the stuff,
and see how it ends up.
I don't even know how big this shake is going
to be or how well this is going to mix, but
we'll see what happens.
I might need a little bit more water here,
probably I need more water.
Let's just see what happens.
This isn't a super high powered blender.
So, if you have like a juicer or something
like that, it will be a lot easier, but let's
just see what happens.
So, looks like I added a little bit too much
water there, but nonetheless, there you go,
blueberries, lettuce, broccoli, green peppers,
and there it all is right there.
That's kind of a big shake.
I should have use less water on that one,
but -- honestly, I'm not doing it for a fact.
With everything mixed up and with the sweetener
in there this is perfectly good.
It's actually pretty enjoyable.
So, that's a very easy way.
If you don't like eating vegetables, take
two minutes out of your day, go into your
fridge, find what's there, mix it all up,
be creative.
And again, that's just a very easy way to
get your vegetables in for the day without
having to sit there, and cook, and chew and
all that kind of stuff.
So, I hope you found this little method here
useful.
As always make sure to hit the like button,
leave a comment and subscribe to stay up-to-date
on feature videos.
Don't forget to grab your 28-day mass building
plan using the link in description box which
includes a free workout plan, meal plan and
supplement guide.
And make sure to join us over on Facebook
for free daily articles, videos, tips and
supplement giveaways.
Thanks for watching.
And I'll talk to you again soon.